# Transcript 1

Introduction
Dom
This is Dom Cooke, and today, we are breaking down Ferrari. Ferrari was founded in 1929 as a 
race team by Italian driver, Enzo Ferrari. But it wasn't until 1947 when Enzo was 50 that Ferrari 
sold its first car. Today, the car company is one of the most recognizable brands in the world, in 
large part because of its history in Formula One, where it's both the oldest and most successful 
team ever. To break down Ferrari, I'm joined by Brian Lum, an investment manager at Baillie 
Gifford.

We discuss how Ferrari went from racing team to a $70-billion business, the various ways that 
it's more like a luxury goods company than a carmaker and how its business model both nurtures 
and monetizes its famous red brand. There aren't many things money can't buy, but in many 
instances, a Ferrari is one of them. The ways in which the company from Maranello in Italy 
manufacturer scarcity is fascinating, and this conversation dives into all the aspects that make 
Ferrari so successful and so unique. Please enjoy this business breakdown of Ferrari.

The Business Behind the Brand
Dom
Brian, part of the fun of this discussion is that we are discussing a business that everyone is 
familiar with. Ferrari, evokes all sorts of images and emotions, status, noise, the red color, the 
prancing horse, Formula One. I would love then to start with some cold facts and numbers. I 
hope you'll surprise people and explain what the business behind the brand and those emotions 
actually looks like.

Brian
Sure. Well, first of all, thank you for having me on the podcast. I'm a big fan and always learn 
a lot from the episodes. So to set the scene, global light vehicle production is in the order of 
80 million units per year. Ferrari delivered only 13,000 cars in 2022. So in the context of the 
industry, Ferrari's unit volume almost irrelevant. In comparison, Porsche is at 300,000 units 
a year and a premium brand like BMW is 2 million. Price wise, a new Ferrari starts at around 
$0.25 million in the U.S. plus options and go all the way to millions for the limited-edition 
supercars.

Today, it is a company with a market cap of USD 78 billion, remarkably worth more than the 
likes of GM or Ford, and I think that just reflects how different Ferrari is to other carmakers. 
But for us, Ferrari is simply one of the best luxury companies that we know. We were 
fortunate enough to be a shareholder of Ferrari for more than a decade, both indirectly 
through what was ’38 Chrysler, and directly since the IPO in 2015.

Dom
That's a great overview and certainly, a good teaser for the rest of the discussion. Before we go 
into those details behind the numbers that you just laid out, I want to rewind to the origin story 
and luxury brands are often defined by their heritage. Ferrari is certainly no different. Enzo 
Ferrari, we're familiar -- a name at least to most people. So what do we need to know about this 
company's history as context for the rest of the business that we'll explain today?

Brian

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 1 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssu
, LLC.



Enzo Ferrari has had a long and absolutely fascinating career. For the purpose of this 
podcast, I would highlight three observations. First, Enzo Ferrari is a racer. He started off his 
career as a racing driver. He enjoyed some success and eventually he moved into managing 
teams for Alfa Romeo for a long time and eventually his own team. Initially, making cars 
waltz away to generate revenues from wealthy patrons to fund the racing team. So the first 
Ferrari badged cars didn't appear until after the war in 1947 when Enzo Ferrari himself was 
nearly 50 years old. So racing was in his DNA.

The second point would be Enzo Ferrari has an absolutely obsessive personality. He loves 
his cars, perhaps I should say that he loves specifically the engine. He has this fantastic 
quote where he's saying, "I sell engines, and the car I throw in for free." But he loves the cars, 
the engine to the extent he was often criticized for caring more about his cars than the race 
drivers during an era where fatalities in motor sport were commonplace.

He had no hobbies outside of cars. He has never taken a holiday as far as I know, rarely even 
leaves Modena or Maranello, and he worked right to the end shortly after the launch of the 
iconic F40 supercar. The whole purpose of his career is the pursuit of perfection. And that 
single mindedness to achieve what he did is astonishing.

Dom
Would it be fair to say that he was quite a challenging character as well?

Brian
I think so. I think that comes on to the third point actually. Enzo Ferrari intuitively 
understood human psychology. He was a genius marketer. There were anecdotes of him 
making clients wait for months for a Ferrari even when there was plenty of inventory just to 
maintain desire. On the other side, he was not an engineer by background, like Henry Royce 
from Rolls-Royce, like Ferdinand Porsche, or even Ferruccio Lamborghini. But I love this 
description of him so much, “I am an agitator of men”, very much surrounding himself with 
the best engineers and designers and then inspiring them and really make things happen.

Dom
You mentioned his obsession and how Ferrari and cars were his everything. I noticed the other 
day that his house is actually in the middle of the racetrack at Fiorano where Ferrari is based. I 
mean you just can't get any closer to your business than being in the middle of the racetrack 
that you've built to test the cars that you're producing.

Brian
That's right. An obsession we see with a lot of successful candidates need to be. Just when 
you say that, it reminds of Elon Musk living in the factory to get his company up and 
running. Anybody who wanted to see Enzo Ferrari will have to go and visit him. He never 
even boarded a plane or an elevator for that matter. He is very much Modena, Maranello that 
is his life, that's where he built his empire.

A History of Racing Pedigree
Dom
We tend to leave the competitive advantages of businesses till later in these discussions. But I 
think that's really the heart of the episode based on the history that you just outlined. I think 

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 2 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssus, LLC.



we've touched on a few of the pieces because when we talked prior to our recording, you 
mentioned that Ferrari’s success in your mind comes down to three things. It's brand, heritage, 
manufacturing ability and its client relationships, all of which you just touched on with Enzo's 
founding story.

I would love to explore those three in much more detail as it relates to the business today, and 
then we can work into the financials of how that translates into dollars and cents. Starting with 
the brand, how have they been able to preserve Enzo's origins and the last 75 years of racing 
heritage into what clients can buy today?

Brian
So the brand heritage took decades to build up. It is very much about history and 
storytelling. Formula One is a big part of it, of course. It's one of the few truly global sports 
franchise, and Ferrari remains the most successful, the most glamorous, the only ever 
present team on the grid. But I think the brand comes more from just numbers. There are 
legendary rivalries on the racetrack. If you think about Niki Lauda and James Hunt's in 
Formula One like the 70s. Think about Ford versus Ferrari in Le Mans in the 60s, 
immortalized by Hollywood in recent years. Incidentally, a biopic about Enzo Ferrari is 
coming imminently.

So there's a lot of cultural relevance there. I will say that thinking of luxury brands that we 
know, one of the metrics that you often talked about in this series is the ratio of people who 
are aware of a brand versus the number of actual clients. I struggle to think of another brand 
that can really compete with Ferrari in this regard. I still remember my daughter coming 
back from nursery when she was 2 or 3 singing Big Red Bus, I am not going to entertain you 
with my rendition, but it does feature Ferrari in the lyrics. I haven't heard them singing about 
Hermes or Patek Philippe yet.

Perhaps Rolex can compete on the brand awareness side, but it is a company that makes a 
million watches a year, not 13,000 cars that Ferrari does. It is really truly one of the special 
brands that we know. And I'll say that when it comes to heritage, there's the product side as 
well. You have this emulating back catalog of iconic Ferraris for which Ferrari themselves 
and collectors draw inspiration. The linear show of mid-engine sports cars went back 50 
years. A front-engine feature of cars went back a long way as well. And we have all these 
supercars, GTO, F40s.

To answer it itself, they were on the teenage bedroom walls of many Ferraristis today. So 
you've got some powerful product franchises. And Ferrari to me does a particularly good 
job at managing this heritage. There's this incredible department Ferrari Classiche in the 
middle of Maranello headquarters where they have this archive of all the Ferraris ever made. 
I think about all the prized vintage Ferraris from the 50s and 60s and 70s, you've got original 
designs and papers sitting in ring binders and folders. So that's -- if need be, they can 
restore this heritage authentically. So for me, talking about history and heritage, this is really 
what I think of.

Dom
Is that all predicated on raising success? If you think about the brand when Enzo started it to be 
able to fund a racing team and today, we still have the Ferrari Formula One team, as you pointed 
that it is the only Formula One team that's been in the championship ever since it was started. 
Which leads me onto a question about how close -- should we be thinking about the Formula 
One team Ferrari and the car company Ferrari as one and the same thing? Or should we 
separate them in some ways?

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 3 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lossu

, LLC.



Brian
I actually had the fortune to visit Maranello a few times as part of my job to understand how 
the company works. And one thing is very clear, the motor sport side of the business and 
the road car side of business, while they are different businesses and involve different 
people, they are integrated. If the Formula One team comes back to the headquarter that is 
situated on that same site, everybody really breathes the successes and sometimes the 
failures of the Formula One team.

And if you can walk into a dealership, you do have posters and TVs, very much charting the 
success of the Formula One team of the year. So it is an intrinsic part of the brand identity. 
But ultimately, nobody needs a Ferrari. Ferrari is a luxury product. It helps -- what Ferrari 
does is to allow its privileged customers to dream of this a bit. You're imagining yourself 
driving down the road using the paddle gear shifts. Imagine you are Schumacher or imagine 
you are someone else. It allows you to live that fantasy a little bit and Formula One as a 
motor sport in general is a great way to do that.

Dom
Brian, I'm thinking that essentially the whole marketing budget is spent on the Formula One 
team. They don't really do traditional advertising or marketing in ways that other companies 
might think about it. They see the Formula One team as their marketing spend.

Brian
It's a big part of that. They do not split out the profitability of the racing team. For what it's 
worth, they do get paid by Formula One and there are also sponsorship and so on. The 
revenues come from the non-car side is around 10%. I would see that as a marketing spend.

What Makes a Ferrari
Dom
And obviously, the win rate, which is an important part of this business is predicated on building 
great machinery, engines, cars, et cetera. What stands out relative to other either car companies 
or luxury good companies about how they've managed to build manufacturing prowess?

Brian
We talked about obsession of Enzo Ferrari earlier. And I'll say the obsession is an essential 
ingredient for true luxury. And we see that on the manufacturing side in abundance. I still 
remember this image of looking at how any V12 engine was painstakingly hand-built by a 
master technician. And so, I remember talking to an engineer years ago about their 
turbocharged V8 engine and the extreme length that they went to make sure that the 
acoustics and the throttle response are as perfect as they can be.

I’ll talk through how they lay out the manifold, the spacing between the pipes, the lay out to 
make sure that harmonies come up correctly as if you were talking about your music 
instruments. These things really stuck with me, and their obsession is very clear. And I will 
say that the manufacturing line at Maranello, it is an artisanal process. You do not see huge 
robots everywhere. The production line is naturally lit.

There are trees inside the factory. It is labor-intensive and level of automation is pretty low 
and it's not the most scalable, and I bring this out because this layout gives an incredible 
flexibility to make design choices that optimizes the car rather than the manufacturing 

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 4 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Co os us, LLC.



process. This is quite distinct from most car companies. On a product portfolio level, I'm, of 
course, an outsider, but I do understand that the executive team and the Board really 
agonize over the question what makes it a Ferrari when it comes to approving new 
products.

A great example would be the industry's trend towards SUVs even amongst brands known 
for making fast cars. SUVs are now more than 50% of the output. If you look at Porsche, 
Lamborghini and Aston Martin, for example, Ferrari has resisted for years. They eventually 
launched Purosangue, which was more practical than existing Ferraris. It's very much a 
sports car paired with a naturally aspirated V12 engine. So that's a good example of how 
obsessive they are around the design, the engineering and product range as well.

Dom
For people who might not be familiar, and I count myself in this, when you say the V12 they're 
putting in effectively what we would call an SUV, and I'm sure they would be shocked at me 
calling their car an SUV, but why is that an interesting design choice or manufacturing choice?

Brian
The V12 engine is very smooth. It's not the most economical may be, but it is a masterpiece 
in terms of the construction and the sporting heritage. The choice to put in a V12 is a clear 
statement about, hey, this is a sports car. If you look at many of the expensive luxury SUVs 
on the market, they tend to have a V8 turbocharged engine and often these engines will be 
shared with many other models.

So for example, take Porsche, Lamborghini, you would find that the V8 engine is shared 
across the Volkswagen Group. It would be a very similar engine inside the Audi. So I think 
with the Purosangue they made a clear statement, this is a real Ferrari, it drives like a Ferrari, 
it sounds like a Ferrari. I didn't mention that the V12 makes a very distinctive sound 
depending on how many cylinders you have in the engine.

The interaction of those gives a distinct harmony that's very much a signature and it helps 
define what the Purosangue is. And even after all that, they have a discipline, incredible 
restrain to say, right, we will limit the output of the Purosangue to less than 20% of overall 
Ferrari outputs. So yes, it's a great example of the lengths that they go through to think 
through these things and to be unique amongst the high-end car makers.

Dom
Can we just hover over that point for a few seconds longer because every car company and 
even up to brands like Ferrari, Lamborghini, et cetera, have been building these SUV bigger cars 
that -- where demand has just been insatiable. And Porsche, I think at this point, basically, is 
their SUVs, I think the Macan and the Cayenne basically pay for everything else in that business 
while Lamborghini, I think, is selling 50% of their cars are their Urus SUV. And so when you say 
there’s restraint, I think that might be an underselling the strategic decision to say we could sell 
probably 90% of these things in terms of our product range, but we're not going to because 
that's not what we stand for.

Brian
That's correct. I suppose that perhaps, this one -- so the next point is around how they 
manage exclusivity. They have to be very good at saying no to people. It's an interesting job. 
They are saying no all the time to clients who are not used to rejection or being made to 
wait. These are high net worth individuals. And the reason is very simple. Ferrari has to 

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 5 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



maintain the exclusivity. The mystical Ferrari should be allocated to the best collectors, I 
think because of the demand of Purosangue, actually, Purosangue would be allocated very 
carefully to just selected customers, and this is a very interesting dynamic.

The Experience of Buying a Ferrari
Dom
I'm always fascinated by how this relationship works. I was listening to a luxury watchmaker, the 
CEO of that business, talking about this scarcity issue and how they're very careful about who 
owns their products. How in practical terms, does Ferrari choose who buys their cars?

Brian
There is a very clear hierarchy of clients. So at the base, you would have newer Ferrari 
customers who would buy their first Ferrari maybe. Then as you build your profile, and this is 
something that's very carefully monitored by Ferrari, you would have different pathways to 
become what they call a collector, and within that, there are a few tiers. So at the top, you 
would have the most serious, loyal collectors with fleets of Ferraris and they would be the 
clients who would be offered the limited editions.

To give an example, one of the cars currently in production is called the SP3 Daytona, which 
is a model that celebrates their racing success in 1960s at Daytona. It's limited to 599. Per 
unit it is more than $2 million. Before it was even announced, they were already allocated to 
all the best clients. It is a very interesting dynamic, and it's part of the journey as a Ferrari 
collector. You work your way up, if you have that desire to. Sometimes it can be a source of 
friction. There were instances in the past where some collectors even tried to sue Ferrari for 
not giving them the privilege to spend $3 million on a car. It is a crazy world really.

Dom
Yes. You're turning down millions of dollars.

Brian
Really care about responsible ownership and engagement with the community, and I think, 
it's that word again, obsession extends towards how they manage relationships with their 
best clients.

Dom
Do they have a direct relationship with those clients? Because as I understand that the 
distribution goes through a network of approved dealers rather than them selling directly. Is it 
that they manage the approved dealers very closely and then those approved dealers are 
expected to look after the clients? Or in some cases, do they have a direct relationship with 
their end client?

Brian
They do have close relationships with dealers. But effectively, the Ferrari management 
would know the top, I don't know, 500 to 600, 700 clients very well. When it comes to 
limited additions, it's very much Ferrari that controls that monitoring. And if you don't have a 
profile, then there's really no chance that you get hold on the limited edition cars.

Dom
Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello

Page 6 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssus, LLC.



And when you talked about the right to own the more exclusive Ferraris, maybe let's flesh out 
the product portfolio and how they have built their lineup to be able to work your way up a 
scale.

Brian
The word entry level feels wrong for Ferrari. But I think they call it the range models. So the 
core would be the 296 GTB, which is a hybrid. It's a mid-engine supercar and for those who 
prioritize comfort a bit more than speed, there are models like the Roma. So these are for 
want of a better term, these are your core part of the portfolio. And then the next step up 
would be limited editions. So these typically would be based on the range models but with 
certain customizations. Beyond that, you would have even more exclusive cars like the Icona 
Series that I mentioned earlier, a few hundred cars, you can talk about millions per car.

And so beyond cars that you can see on the road, there are also track-only specials. They do 
run racing competitions sort of for the best clients. A good example would be model 
numbers that end in XX to highlight how extreme these cars are. Many of these are not even 
allowed to be driven on the road. And then you have things like supercars. Some maybe 
launch once every few years. The Enzo is a good example. I mentioned Enzo because for me 
growing up, that's the halo car. But before that, you've got the F40s and the F50s and the 
GTOs and so on.

So you've got the multiple levels. Most of these we would never see on the road. I think 
beyond that, they do have for the very best clients and also racing-minded clients, it is 
possible to get access to a Formula One car. They've got this spectacular facility next to the 
Fiorano Circuit where you see all the past race cars in on very special occasions. It's quite an 
experience to throw off a true Formula One car. This is something that's clearly very hard for 
many competitors to replicate.

Dom
The client experience, you often talk about that with cars other than the process of buying a car. 
But when you buy a car from Ferrari, particularly past the range model once you become a 
collector of these Ferraris and you've proven your relationship to the company, can you flesh 
out a bit more what the client experience looks like at that end of the spectrum and why people 
will become repeat customers? I think there's some really interesting stats about how many new 
Ferrari cars are sold to existing Ferrari owners and how that might be different to some other 
businesses.

Brian
Yes. So 2/3 of new cars delivered last year went to the existing Ferrari clients. And more 
than half of those clients actually have multiple Ferraris. These are really spectacular 
numbers to illustrate the loyalty there. Now why do clients become collectors? Well, first of 
all, Ferrari makes brilliant and collectible cars. And we talked about product heritage and 
lineage earlier. The mid-engine V8s, front-engine V12s. You have convertible sports cars and 
so on. Collectors often end up owning cars from different generations of these product 
lineages. Perhaps it's a bit like the big film franchises.

A new James Bond can come out or Star Wars comes out and you go and see that, it's 
almost a similar dynamic. The other elements would be that collectors may want different 
Ferraris depending on the occasion. The perfect Ferrari for a weekend away is not the same 
as one that you'd use for a camp day. Ferrari calls it different Ferrari for different moments. 
Now most people's direct experience of Ferrari would be catching sight of one on the 
public roads. With the collectors, things like road trips, race events, meet-ups can be an 

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 7 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col s u
, LLC.



important part of the ownership experience.

For example, last year, Ferrari organized an event, where I think about 70 or 80 Monza SP1 
and SP2s. So these are highly limited supercars at $2 million plus each. A road trip for these 
owners to drive around Italy as a celebration. So these events really add to the experience 
and it also contributes towards your profile with Ferrari. And last but not least, I think clearly, 
most Ferraris are not pruned very much. There's a lot of enjoyment happening not on the 
road, but either on a private track and simply in the garage. It's a piece of art to admire.

Dom
Yes, the parallels to other luxury goods, whether it's art, watches, handbags, there are many of 
them. And it reminds me of a question I wanted to ask in terms of vertical integration in the 
manufacturing facilities. You often see a lot of these luxury goods who want to keep control 
over the end-to-end process of making these things because they are artisans, they know their 
craft. They are obsessed with it. How vertically integrated is for Ferrari? Do they buy parts from 
other places very much or at all?

Brian
Ferrari's an interesting one. They do have a network of trusted suppliers, who they rely on to 
produce brakes and tires, and so on. A lot of the facilities are based in one place, Maranello. 
It's about assembly. So engine assembly happens on site. A lot of the interior, the stitching 
of the interior happens on sites. Plus, they do rely on their suppliers for not just the 
components but also innovation, and they have got a fantastic network for that.

The Patek Philippe of Cars
Dom
So I guess one pushback to what we've just been talking about is that the three components 
that you've laid out in terms of what makes this business really special, it feels like I could say 
similar things about other high-end car manufacturers if you think about Lamborghini or any of 
the other "competitors" to this business. Why would you say that Ferrari is different with respect 
to these three areas?

Brian
I think some of the peers would be able to claim the same with one or two of the three 
factors that I mentioned. I struggle to think of a direct peer that can do all three things in 
combination as well. Thinking through the competitors, you do have niche makers, Bugatti 
and Koenigsegg and Pagani and so on. They make exotic supercars with extreme 
performance, but they wouldn't have the heritage or the client base to compete directly 
with Ferrari. Then you have companies like Porsche, the high echelons of the 911 franchise 
would be quite comparable to a Ferrari.

But overall, the philosophy of the company is very different. I have a lot of admiration for 
Porsche, and it has struck a quite astounding balance between volume and market 
positioning. It is not Ferrari. We talked about watches slightly earlier. To me, Porsche is a bit 
like a Rolex. It is a mass manufactured product, incredibly well-made and their achieved 
volume and price premium that's almost unfathomable, but Ferrari is more like a Patek 
Philippe. It's at the pinnacle.

Then you have companies like Lamborghini, which has a similar position to Ferrari in many 

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 8 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lossus, LLC.



ways, it doesn't quite have that same racing heritage and it's also part of a bigger group, 
which means a lower scope if you want truly uncompromised design. I suppose you can put 
in two British brands in there, Aston Martin and McLaren. Aston Martin is an interesting one, 
we know well it is actually run by Ferrari’s ex-CEO. And so under Lawrence Stroll's leadership 
for the past few years, they have made progress and they have behaved more like a luxury 
brand.

It does have a degree of heritage, but the breadth and depth of the client base in the 
product portfolio would take a long time to build up. I think you'd say that McLaren also 
faces similar challenges. Electrification is one part where perhaps it's something that we can 
come on to later.

Dom
Yes, we will definitely get there. It feels very much like you're joining a club when you buy a 
Ferrari rather than necessarily buying a car, and the club just happens to be one of the most 
exclusive clubs on the planet. We've gotten probably half an hour into this discussion. We 
haven't really talked about the financials. So I'm sure we'll agitate a few people. So let's go there 
now. Everything that we've talked about, how does that translate into dollars and cents? If you 
talk us through the high-level numbers and then we can dig into them.

Brian
Sure. So the revenues this year is expected to be close to EUR 6 billion. Nearly 90% of that 
that would be related to selling cars or spare parts, with the remainder coming from racing 
sponsorship. They also have a lifestyle segment. So they moved into a high-end fashion in a 
more serious manner last year or so.

They make mid- to high 20s percent EBIT margin, which is incredible for a car company. 
That's why we do think it is one. This is usually cash generative. They paid down much of the 
debt they inherited from the Fiat Chrysler spin-off back in 2015. And so, it was a good 
chunk of as free cash flow to shareholders through buybacks and dividends.

Dom
If we were just to make some comparisons, particularly around the margin profile of the 
business, both to more traditional car companies and then other luxury goods companies, where 
would this business fit?

Brian
Label is an interesting thing. We talked a bit internally. We talked a lot about whether this is 
a car company or a luxury company. So car companies, you're talking about single-digit 
operating margins, if you're lucky, maybe low double digits, low teens. For example, Porsche 
would be high teens. That's very good for a car company. Luxury goods is more in line with 
Ferrari, 20% plus, 30% plus rating margin. So Ferrari is very much in that club.

Dom
You said something provocative when we talked ahead of this discussion that this is almost a 
SaaS-based model in terms of the way that they earn revenue. Can you explain that thinking and 
why you might compare it to what we generally think of as a technology business model?

Brian
I made that comment, partly trying to understand the revenue drive for some of this 

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 9 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ss

s, LLC.



business. We talked about the top collectors earlier. And to become a top collector, you do 
need to build up a profile and the SaaS comparison is very much a reference to, hey, you 
need a regular record of buying multiple Ferraris to be considered a top-top collector. It's 
not quite a subscription stream. But there's an element of regularity that goes beyond a 
single discrete big purchase that point around VIPs to me is fast, they say. We talked about 
the SP3 Daytona earlier. It's limited to 599, $2 million plus.

Think of Ferrari's revenue of $5.9 billion this year on its own, it is quite significant, and that's 
without considering the purchase record it takes to get there. One way to think about the 
financial is not just to think, okay, 13,000 cars multiplied by the average price of fleet units. 
How can we flex those numbers? What I'm trying to do is trying to understand the 
underlying driver. What is the unit economics? So approach it always from an angle of okay, 
the lifetime value of a collector looks something like this. How is Ferrari building that 
business?

The hierarchy of clients, you’ve got this pyramid. Are they expanding the base of the 
pyramid? Or are they stretching the pyramid to ever higher and higher heights? And so, I 
think these are different mental models for us to think about Ferrari in different ways to try 
to take into account many fascinating dynamics that we touched on earlier.

Dom
I would love for you to answer that question for me about whether they're expanding the base 
or stretching the pyramid. I'm presuming they're doing both, but maybe we can just underline 
exactly how and what that means.

Brian
Ferrari does disclose some statistics on the size of the client base. So over the past 5 years, 
they have expanded their client base meaningfully. I would say that's a positive signal for me 
in the past couple of years is the launch of the 296 GTB and GTS, which is a hybrid model, 
where the V6, is a hybrid model in a V6 engine, this is the start of a new product lineage 
effectively replaces the V8 mid-engine supercars.

My understanding is that the 296 really brought in a lot of interest from a lot of new Ferrari 
clients. So thinking through that lifetime value is the beginning of a lot of new cohorts may 
not be able to get one just now, but it is a model that signals the start of something new. 
From what I can tell, the 296 appeals to existing Ferrari clients as well, as well as building, 
attracting the next generation of Ferraristis, if you will, thus expanding the base of the 
pyramid and there are stats like I think 40% of the new clients would be under 40.

So therefore, snippet suggests that Ferraris aren’t just bought by 60- and 70-year-old 
petrol heads. They are bringing a new generation of Ferrari fans, and to me, that's a very 
positive signal. Thinking through that pyramid, they are expanding the base. The collectors 
are -- the number of Ferraris in the collectors' garage are going up, and certainly are coming 
up with new pathways for Ferrari fans if you are just starting your journey to move up.

So these are all the dynamics that we traditionally think of where we analyze SaaS business 
models or subscription-based business models and what are the cross-sell opportunities or 
how they -- how you would improve the ASP, how do you improve client retention. And I'm 
just reborrowing frameworks from analyzing different businesses to try to understand 
what's going on here.

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 10 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colo
sus, LLC.



The Scarcity vs. Growth Trade-Off
Dom
Yes. That makes a lot of sense to me. The one thing that they have working against them as do 
most luxury businesses that they can't just keep growing volumes because at some point, that 
will reduce their exclusivity and start tarnishing the brand. There are other levers that they can 
pull in order to make the business more profitable in terms of margin profile. How do they 
operate this scarcity versus increasing profitability?

Brian
First of all, I'd say that I would be somewhat concerned if unit following accelerates. So 
about 13,000 going up slightly every year, that's perfectly fine. But the opportunity here is 
very much increasing the lifetime value of collectors, bringing new collectors. How do you 
square that with the volume growth more pedestrian would be, first of all, customization. A 
typical Ferrari with the options up in, I think, USD 50,000 or USD 60,000 or USD 70,000. 
I'm just guessing here.

But for me, it's quite interesting that at the top level of customization called tailor-made 
was only launched, I think, just over 10 years ago. There are huge opportunities for Ferrari to 
push that further. Ferrari's coming with new ways to engage the community all the time. So 
that part of it, I'm quite optimistic about, and this one is sure to be.

Dom
I think I remember seeing in the summer that they had to revise their profit guidance up earlier 
this year based on the number of personalization that they were doing. And obviously, they're 
very beneficial to the bottom line of this business. The one I think that stands out a little bit is 
they have this fashion segment, which is a very small piece of the business at the moment, but 
they look like they're really trying to push it and grow it. What is this? And why are they doing it?

Brian
I don't really have a huge amount of insights on this part of the business myself. I would say 
that over the past few years, they have taken the non-car part much more seriously. They 
have license agreements where a partner can come in and license a Ferrari brand and print it 
on products that hasn't gone through Ferrari's own internal processes.

They have retaken that control in-house much more in the past few years. And fashion is an 
area that they are taking very seriously. Now I can't say whether -- how to gauge the 
probability of success, but the fact that they are experimenting is great, and they seem to 
be doing it in a thoughtful way and very much leveraging the existing brand equity. So we'll 
see what happens there.

Dom
Is it just another way of expanding the bottom of that pyramid? A 25-year-old might be able to 
buy a jacket from Ferrari and they've been a Ferrari fan for their whole life, but they won't be 
able to buy a Ferrari until they're probably early 40s, for example. And so it's just another way to 
get people into the brand early and then hopefully, if they strike gold, they're then able to join 
the club in a more traditional sense.

Brian
That's right. I think related to that, I talked about 296 earlier, bringing in new clients. The 

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 11 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
los u

, LLC.



same with the Purosangue. Potentially, it's the same with Roma. They talk about offering 
different Ferraris for different Ferraristis. I think it's the same concept. They need to be very 
clear about what Ferrari stands for. But within those confines, they are pushing at a full 
thrust in the company on how they manage exclusively in the brand, but that's a very 
important part if that's the case.

Dom
The other piece of the numbers is the cost profile. Is there anything interesting in there? Maybe 
they spend more in R&D than other businesses or they spend less on marketing? Is there 
anything that stands out that says that's part of the Ferrari DNA?

Brian
Ultimately, manufacturing efficiency isn't really a priority here. If you look at the line 
between gross margin and operating margin, gross margin is at mid-40s percent, more than 
half of that would be on R&D. Now Ferrari doesn't have a parent where they can leverage 
research. In some ways, that's to be expected. There are bigger car makers like Mercedes 
that do make high-end cars, that do make racecars. Obviously, they can draw on the 
technology. That's the investment that Mercedes made across a much bigger base of units. 
So direct comparisons on the cost base would be difficult.

Dom
Yes. Mercedes is a really good example, I think, because they obviously have a Formula One 
business. They make the high-end cars plus the more midrange cars as well. Their Formula One 
business is very separate to the rest of the company, both in location and I think in ideology. 
Their Formula One business, we touched on a bit. How meaningful is the team to the financial 
profile of the company?

Brian
The investment case of Ferrari is very much for me based on the car business. Formula One 
is, I think as I said earlier, the non-car business s is about 10%. I don't really expect that to be 
much bigger. Obviously, they would love to have more success on track in Formula One, and 
there are useful R&D value in running motorsports, especially in powertrain and when it 
comes to having people move sometimes between the racing operation and the car design, 
its useful know-how to share sometimes. But the most important part of that is to get the 
Ferrari brand out there. That's the true value of motorsports in my mind. I say motorsports 
rather than Formula One because they have reentered Le Mans the past year.

Dom
And won it.

Brian
They won it, so creating new stories rather than always talking about 60s and 70s and so on. 
It is a very important part of the company's brand building and DNA. When you talk to 
Ferrari employees, racing is always top of the mind and thus completely authentic. And I'd 
also say that Ferrari is the national team of Italy when it comes to motorsports.

You just have to go to Italian Grand Prix to realize the passion of the fan base. So it's almost 
in parallel, Ferrari is in the middle of this cluster of motorsports companies and high-end car 
companies. Their racing DNA is, of course, heavily contributed by Ferrari, but it's that region, 
it does have that racing heritage that goes beyond just Ferrari.

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 12 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
los us, LLC.



Dom
We talked a lot about selling new Ferraris. One interesting piece that kind of extends across the 
luxury landscape is the secondary market. How closely do they watch that and/or care about it?

Brian
I can't really speak for themselves, but it's very clear that preowned markets for Ferrari is in a 
much stronger position than many of the other high-end sports car companies in terms of 
value retention. It's an interesting stat. So the last time I checked the top 30 most expensive 
cars ever sold in auction, Ferrari truly dominates. I think you're talking about 20 out of the 
top 30 were some Jaguars and Aston Martins and Mercedes making up with the rest. And 
the reason that's the case would be, when you buy a Ferrari, there's an implicit commitment 
from the company to support the maintenance of these cars.

So when your car gets to 20 years, it's officially a vintage. You can certify it, you get into the 
official Ferrari program. People say that Ferrari is a life. You cannot scrap a Ferrari. So 
thinking about those cars, they depreciate for 7, 8, 9, 10 years and scrapped. With Ferrari, 
that's not the case. So value retention, of course, it depreciates in the first three years of 
their life, but it hits a certain point that it stabilizes. And for the limited editions, quite often, 
they appreciate. I'm sure this is something that Ferrari themselves monitor to have the 
insight to tell you exactly what they do with it other than to say that preowned Ferraris tend 
to retain their value much better than all of its peers.

The Electric Future of Ferrari
Dom
I guess if you really look at who's buying these cars and you know their history with the business 
and you're not afraid that they're going to flip the car in a week's time, once you bought it, then 
that will surely help supply in the secondary market or limiting it anyway.

One of the biggest threats it seems like from the outside to a business like this is the 
electrification of the car industry in general or climate concerns about internal combustion 
engines and the car industry itself. I want to start with a very broad question of how do you view 
electrification with regards to Ferrari's future?

Brian
Well it helps that Ferrari directly, indirectly for over a decade, are stocking up their portfolio. 
The implication of electrification is the most wholly debated topic. We are big believers in 
EVs. We believe the future is electric, and we have crossed that point. It's clear that we 
need to decarbonize transportation. Ferraris are not about transportation. They would say 
themselves, and we completely agree, that Ferrari should not be considered a mode of 
transportation. And the implication is that turning Ferraris completely electric wouldn't 
make sense from an environmental standpoint.

Think about EV and EV, it takes more energy to make upfront, but you get that payback 
over years through the use space. But Ferraris, they get driven in 2,000 miles a year so you 
can make a full battery with Ferrari, and you may not get a payback. So for us, it makes 
sense for Ferraris to focus on hybrid in a short term. And interestingly, in the last quarter, 
they gave the output. hybrids, i.e., the 296 is over 50% of shipments.

In the future, they are already committed to launch a battery Ferrari in 2025. Now social 
license is very important, and they are working very hard in general to reduce the emissions 

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 13 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col s us, LLC.



of Scope 1 and Scope 2 in making the car itself. So they are leaving it up to the clients say, 
hey, if you want a V12 engine, we do that. We've got a hybrid Ferrari that offers amazing 
performance, and they are doing electrification for performance research. They've always 
been very clear on that.

And they're also investing in battery technology and developing battery at Ferrari in keeping 
with the character. With every confidence Ferrari could keep the obsessiveness and 
develop true Ferraris regardless of powertrain. But of course, it is a moving part. I would say 
one more thing in thinking through the megatrends of the automotive industry, 
electrification is one part of it, but also autonomous driving is another and who knows 
where ownership of automotive will go. And the trend is that cars are becoming more about 
utility. And Ferrari is about the opposite.

Those two directions point in different ways. On the one side, we might worry about 
disruption. Is Ferrari going to be less relevant in the future? But the other scenario would be 
that when you have a product category that becomes more and more about utility, it opens 
up the space for creativity, it opens up the space for ever more high-end products. And 
we've seen that with watches and that they have gone through multiple disruptions. Think 
about the Quartz crisis in the 70s. The watch industry has been making intricate mechanical 
movements for hundreds of years.

And then Seiko came in and said, hey, here's a battery-powered movements, and that's 
much better than the mechanical one in terms of precision just objectively speaking. It's 
much cheaper. You can tell a time much better. At the time, the watch industry was going 
through a crisis. You had said earlier you were listening to a podcast on a luxury brand and 
guess what, all the top luxury brands and watches make mechanical movements. They make 
moon-phases. They make tourbillons. They make minute repeaters. All of these are 
completely useless.

But that is always what luxury is about. They go over the top and the value is in the 
complexity itself rather than the function. And I think this is the direction that the car 
industry could be going. And that's, I think, where Ferrari's prospect can be very bright in 
that you always completely get rid of the constraint of making something that's practical 
and every day. You can really let loose on human creativity. You talked about Porsche a bit 
earlier, it is often called an everyday supercar. Ferrari is not an everyday. They don't want to 
be. But I think that's quite an interesting parallel.

Dom
That's a fascinating idea that actually as the car industry moves to electrification, maybe Ferrari 
stands out even more than they have done to this point. The analogy to the quartz crisis is going 
to be a really interesting one to watch because those businesses got sucked into making quartz 
watches and then they ended up saying, no, what we're about is these mechanical ones. That's 
what people want to buy us for despite them not being able to tell the time as precisely as 
these battery-operated watches.

Do you see that as a short-term risk here with Ferrari? They've said they're going to build an 
electric car. They're already building hybrid cars. Is that potentially a risk in the short term that 
they get pulled along by the megatrend? And then in 10 years' time, they say, we've lost what 
made us Ferrari in the first please.

Brian
They're producing hybrid Ferraris and they are developing pure electric Ferrari for the right 

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 14 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssus, LLC.



reasons. It is about performance and enjoyment. Let me be very clear on that. So take the 
hybrid because you've got this electric motor, it makes acceleration even better, even with 
the EV version of Ferrari in 2025, one common concern would be that, hey, you're losing 
that V12 sound or the V8 sound that's been such an important part of supercars. But they've 
also been very clear about the battery electric Ferrari will still have a sound signature and 
they're investing a lot in that. We've only got so many sensors to work with.

They will not give up on sound as part of the experience. Driving pleasure, it's not just about 
sound. It's not just about straight-line acceleration. It's about braking. It's about balance. It's 
about lateral acceleration, and all those things are expertise that Ferrari has developed over 
many decades. And I must say when Tesla first came along and you see all these YouTube 
videos of Tesla going faster than your traditional supercars. The question is, hey, where does 
this belief of the traditional supercar companies?

Ultimately, for a company like Ferrari because they don't need to make practical cars, they 
would end up making design choices that are very different to EVs that are designed with 
everyday use in mind. So there's a scope for them to differentiate it. And this is something 
that I've probably now a bit more comfortable with than let's say, 5 years ago, but it's clear 
that the EV tipping point is coming our way.

Management and Other Sources of Edge
Dom
And if we think about the management team, clearly, they have an interesting balance to strike 
here with this business based on everything that we've talked about. Is there a story there that 
we should know in terms of who runs the business now? Obviously, Enzo was part of it for a 
really long time. Who now oversees the operation? What does the Board look like? What from 
the management team is interesting?

Brian
So the CEO is Benedetto Vigna. He has been in the post since 2021. He was a physicist by 
training. He was a prolific inventor with, I think, hundreds of patents under his name as well 
as an accomplished executive at STMicro, which is a leading semiconductor company 
before joining Ferrari. This may seem like a surprising background for Ferrari’s CEO, but 
there's, of course, strong alternative and luxury expertise amongst the top team to 
complement the CEO to take background. The Board is fantastic. First, you'll never guessed 
the company makes cars just by looking at the Board.

So lots of luxury experience carrying LVMH and, so on. There's an Apple executive, which 
perhaps ties in with the importance of tech, tight relationships and services and so on. 
There is a lead shareholder here in Ferrari, Exor, which is the holding company of Agnelli 
family. So Giovanni Agnelli's grandson, John Elkann is the Chairman of the Board. He's 
someone that we have interacted with, and we have a lot of respect for. The second biggest 
shareholder would be Piero Ferrari, who is Enzo Ferrari's son. I think like many luxury 
businesses, the long-term perspective offered by these shareholders really matters.

Dom
If we think about the future in terms of your most bullish picture that you could paint us, what 
does that look like? Because it doesn't seem like there's going to be a huge inflection point here. 
The process of managing a luxury brand like Ferrari is steady, constant improvement. You're 
growing volumes marginally, if at all, but you're trying to get margin improvements over time. 

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 15 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssus, LLC.



What would be the most bullish picture you paint us be?

Brian
It is very much about the longevity of the opportunity. With all luxury companies that they 
grew too fast, they make us nervous. I would use that purview that we've talked about 
earlier as the framework for understanding the long-term bullish scenario, adding a new 
generation of Ferraristi at the base. They might take time to get through as we know some 
very promising signs there. And at the top, we suspect there's plenty of room for that to 
grow, for that pyramid to get ever taller. That would be the direction that I would 
investigate. It's interesting that for almost all of us, $300,000, $400,000 sounds like a lot 
for a car where your mass market car is more like a $30,000.

But you're thinking through the fast wealth of those right at the top, new classic Ferrari 
customers. The ratio of their wealth versus someone average would be much more than 10x 
or 20x. Going back to the watch analogy, Patek Philippe starts at 5 figures. They can go 
easily up to 6 figures. What's the ratio of that relative to an average watch is it way more 
than 10. So I think at the top, there's plenty of room to stretch it further.

And as long as the company manages that brand and carefully with the long term in mind. It 
is always very hard to evaluate companies with that longevity. We talked very similarly about 
Hermes with my colleague, Mark Urquhart, who came on to the show and it is a similar sort 
of dynamic. For us, it's more about the culture and how careful they manage that brand and 
cultivate the very small group of collectors. It is about the lifetime value, if you will. I think 
they want the value off the top 1,000 clients and I suspect that's a very big number.

Dom
It's got plenty of zeros. One of the things that I should have asked earlier in the discussion was 
just the markets in which they sell into. Often, we talk about brands like this, and Asia has 
become an important place where they sell into. One way of maintaining scarcity is by selling 
into a market where there traditionally hasn't been many of your products.

So when you go out on the streets, you don't see as many Ferraris, but they are actually selling 
more Ferraris. They just happen to be in a different place in the world. Is that dynamic similar 
here?

Brian
Yes, it is a very global distribution already. It's interesting you brought up that point. For 
years, they limited themselves to 7,000 cars under Luca Montezemolo. Montezemolo, set 
7,000 cars as the limit. We want to be exclusive. It is somewhat arbitrary number, but it's 
part of the rational for increasing that and still be able to have that exclusivity is because of 
the new sources of wealth around the world. And it is not like you see multiple Ferraris in 
your average city with certain exceptions.

I think part of managing that exclusivity also comes from collectors, the best collectors 
having more Ferraris. So you're not seeing a flood of Ferraris on the road because your best 
collectors can only drive one at a time. And so most of the time actually they're driving 
some other cars for transportation purposes. That's an interesting dynamic. And it's 
something that I would watch as the Ferrari portfolio becomes more electrified. It's very 
important to keep that sense occasion. When you see the drive of Ferrari, the electric Ferrari 
experience should be no different in that regard, and that's something that they have to 
manage.

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 16 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssus, LLC.



Dom
It's going to be amazing to see what that electric Ferrari looks like, sounds like, feels like. Will be 
an interested observer. Brian, this has been a really, really interesting discussion about one of 
the most interesting brands in the world, I would argue. But we always finish these discussions 
with the same question, and that's, what have you learned from your time with and studying 
Ferrari that you could share for fellow investors as well as operators?

Brian
First of all, I think that's a nominal question and I should actually think of incorporating that 
into our own investment framework when it comes to reviewing companies. I would point to 
two things. We've talked a lot during this podcast about whether it's a car company and a 
luxury company. So for me, the broad point that I would be, that as human beings, we like to 
categorize things, put things into boxes. In the context of the financial industry, that makes 
sense. I talked about mental models and mental shortcuts.

So I guess the first lesson I learned is if you have to categorize the things, make sure you 
get it right. I think better still for investment research, we should really discard these labels 
and think from first principles instead. This lesson really implies very broadly. I am very used 
to artificial spinnery divides and emerging markets or developed markets, growth or value of 
companies, small cow or cash cow. These are all boxes that I will put things into. When it 
comes to critical investment thinking, we should go beyond that. And Ferrari is a particularly 
good example to remind us, don't be lazy and rely on labels for our investment insight.

And the second lesson would be thinking through Ferrari's edge, it's a company with one of 
the strongest competitor edge that I know. But if you ask me to articulate it, and I think I 
have struggled in this episode to truly articulate it well. I can't point to something that 
Ferrari does that no one else can. It's not like an ASML where they are the only company 
that can make an EUV machine. It's not like an AI company or the leading Internet 
businesses where they clearly benefit from network effects, two sided or three sided.

Here, the edge is more combinatorial. There's a bunch of little things that they do extremely 
well and are completely obsessive about. That in combination makes them unique. And I 
think that's an important lesson and sometimes -- certainly, when I do investment research, 
we sometimes try to think about investment competitive edge in isolation. What is it that 
they can do that no one else can? But quite often, the answers can be more of an nuance. 
And I think that combinatory point is one that we can apply quite broadly.

Dom
See, a good set of lessons. It's very difficult to attack a moat that you can't put your finger on, 
which is probably a good thing to have as well.

Brian
It's very easy to juggle one ball. But when it comes to three or four or five, it gets 
exponentially harder, and we've certainly observed with other luxury companies that can do 
one or two but struggle with three. It's exactly the same dynamic. And I think that's what 
makes Ferrari special having that ability and discipline to act like a luxury company, maintain 
that obsession and have a clear sense of DNA that backs up the brand.

Dom
And even harder to do it for decades and decades. These businesses are 75 years old now, 
which is extraordinary. Thank you so much for breaking Ferrari down with us.

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 17 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col
sus, LLC.



Brian
Thank you so much. This has been fun.

Business Breakdowns - Ferrari: Magic from Maranello
Page 18 of 18. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



# Transcript 2

Introduction
Ferrari was a genius of entrepreneurship, a visionary who possessed the ability to realize his 
dreams. When asked how he wanted to be remembered, he famously replied as someone who 
dreamt of becoming Ferrari. Ferrari was animated by an extraordinary passion that led him to 
build a product with no equal. He started in a tiny village in Northern Italy, which, thanks to him, 
became the epicenter of the most exclusive automotive production in the world. Ferrari had 2 
fundamental talents. First, he was, by his own admission, a shaker of ideas in men. Gifted with a 
charisma that effortlessly captured anyone who crossed this path, Ferrari could stimulate the 
energy and creativity of his colleagues like no one else. He was very demanding, especially 
when things were going well. We all had to be careful not to sit on our laurels. He was absolutely 
dedicated and could be ruthless.

 

Ferrari's second talent, he was an absolute marketing genius. I remember one visit from a very 
important and wealthy American client. The factory parking lots were filled with unsold cars, 
which we tried to hide from public view. The American said, "I would like to buy a Ferrari." Ferrari 
replied, "Yes, of course. But we have so many requests. I'll do what I can, but we're afraid that 
you'll have to wait several months before you can buy one." That was because a Ferrari must be 
desired. It cannot and must not be perceived as something that is immediately available. 
Otherwise, that dream is gone. In order to maintain the exclusivity of the brand, production has 
always been lower than the requests of the market. Ferrari, the man, was an intentional prisoner 
of his own myth. He had habits that he rigorously respected. He never boarded a plane. He left 
Maranello only on rare occasions.

 

Those who wanted to meet him had to come to his office no matter where they came from. He 
wore dark glasses in order to observe and judge everybody without giving them the opportunity 
to look them in the eye. I have many personal memories of Enzo Ferrari and the years that I 
spent with him. I like to go back in time to September 7, 1975, the day of the Italian Grand Prix at 
Monza. It was an unforgettable Sunday. We won the race and brought back to Maranello, after 11 
years, the world title with one race to go. I can still see the roaring crowds and the flags and feel 
the embrace of the whole team. But above all, I remember my phone call with Ferrari. From the 
sound of his voice, I realized that he had been crying. This had never happened before. "Thank 
you", he said to me. It was a very emotional moment that will forever be in my heart. In this 
painstakingly researched entirely accurate account, Luca Dal Monte has vividly captured in 
these pages the Enzo that I knew and loved.

 

That was written by Luca di Montezemolo. It's from the -- it's an excerpt from the foreword of 
the book that I read this week and the one I'm going to talk to you about today, which is Enzo 
Ferrari: Power, Politics, and the Making of an Automotive Empire. So this is the longest 
biography that I've read for the podcast, and there's a lot to get to, so I want to get right into it. 
Before I go right to the book, though, I want to talk about the scene that's in the new Ford v 
Ferrari movie, and it's Lee Iacocca talking to Henry Ford II and a bunch of other executives 
about why he thinks they should make an offer for Ferrari. And when he brings up Ferrari, the 
other Ford executives that are extremely unlikeable in the movie, if you go see it, you'll see why, 
they're kind of dismissive. They're like, "Why? Like we build more cars in an afternoon than 

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 1 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



Ferrari does all year."

Chasing Perfection
And he said -- and he says, Enzo Ferrari will go down in history as the greatest car manufacturer 
of all time. And they're like, "What? Why?" Like it's not because he builds the most cars. It's 
because he spent every lira, which is the currency of Italy at the time, which could be -- it's 
because he spent every lira chasing perfection. He was completely obsessed.

And if you go see the movie, you'll see the difference. The people in the movie that are -- that 
come across extremely likable, it's interesting, because when I read that book last week, Go Like 
Hell, I had the same thoughts. Carroll Shelby, misfit. Like if you like this podcast, you're going to 
love Carroll Shelby. If you like this podcast, you're going to love Enzo Ferrari. You're going to love 
Ken Miles, the driver.

Those are the people that come off -- at least like even if you don't consider Enzo Ferrari likable, 
you respect his dedication to his craft, right? And then in the movie, just like in the book, Henry 
Ford II comes off less likable and the organization, the bureaucracy of the Ford organization in 
the 1960s, they're almost like the villain in the movie, if you will. And I kind of picked up the same 
thing when I was reading.

Now the second thing he said that I think is important to understand Enzo Ferrari, it's his 
personality because not only is he unbelievably dedicated. It just said in the foreword, the 
person that worked for him says he built a product that had no equal. That's exactly what he set 
out to do. In that case, he reminds me a lot -- there's a lot in his personality in the way he talks 
about other people and other products that remind me of Steve Jobs. You're going to see that 
here because that's all he cared about.

And if you were dedicated to what you're doing, like he respected Shelby even if they didn't like 
each other, he respected the driver, Ken Miles. He gives him like a tip of the hat at the end of the 
movie because he saw, the same passion that he has to what he's doing all day, they had. 
Anybody that doesn't possess that passion, he doesn't respect. So he talks about -- this is after 
Lee Iacocca travels to Italy and tries to do a deal with Ferrari. It falls through. I'm not going to 
repeat much of that because I talked about it last week.

But he talks about -- this is an insight into his personality. So Henry Ford asked Lee Iacocca 
what did Enzo say. And Lee Iacocca was trying to like -- in the movie, he was like kind of 
dancing around. And he said, "Just tell me what he says." This is Enzo talking to Lee. He goes, tell 
Henry Ford -- tell him, Henry Ford II meaning, tell him that he's not Henry Ford, that he's Henry 
Ford II. Right? So I had respect for Henry Ford and a lot of respect for what he did. I don't 
respect Henry Ford II.

And then he says -- he goes what else did he say. Tell him that Ford makes ugly little cars in ugly 
little factories. Tell him that he's fat and he's pig-headed. So he has this like unbelievably -- I 
think the word that Luca used in the foreword there was ruthless. 100%, Ferrari was -- like and 
this is why I think he's so -- everybody else thinks he's so complicated, and I did too for a little 
bit. And now maybe I'm rethinking that position or I think I have completely rethought the 
position. Yes, he's ruthless.

But he's ruthless if you get in the way of his one goal, which is to build the best car in the world. 
Not only did he want to make the -- his cars the fastest, he wanted to make them beautiful. 
That's why everything was handmade. And that's why he was fine. He took a completely 
different route than Ford did. He says I don't want your big ugly automated factories and build 
-- and have success because I can build 8,000 cars in a week and whatever it is. I will build 300 

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 2 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colo
us, LLC.



cars a year or 700 cars a year or 1,500 cars a year. I think that's a good place to start to 
understand, like he's complex -- and I know I'm repeating myself. He's complex but he's really 
not. He's just -- he's hard for other people to understand that are not obsessives.

And the one thing about this podcast is every single person that we study on this podcast is an 
obsessive. So if you take Enzo into account like all the other great entrepreneurs that we study, 
then he kind of makes sense because he's cut from the same cloth. But I think when you interact 
with other normal people, whatever you want to call them, they have a hard time understanding 
that.

Okay. So let me jump into the book because I have a lot of highlights, and this thing is massive. 
It's like it's heavy. It's hard for me even to hold up right now. So I want to go to his early life. He 
learned a lot. His father dies when Enzo was only 18 years old. And so they didn't have a long 
time together, but his father's name was Alfredo. He had an unbelievable impact on to not only 
how Enzo lived his life but how he ran this business.

Alfredo was also an entrepreneur. He had his own workshops. He worked on cars and 
everything. So he says, Alfredo turned his hand as needed to all the different tasks required by 
his company, manager, designer, accountant, typist. Enzo would never forget this lesson. From 
his father, young Enzo learned the importance of the order of things and of diligently keeping a 
record of everything that went on. So this is something that Enzo does his entire life. He has a 
notebook that he carries around and writes on every single thing that happens to him, and he 
does this throughout his whole life.

Back to the book. For the boy, the father was a living example of a devotion to duty. Okay? 
Check. So Enzo definitely has devotion to duty. A strong individualist, they're using the word 
individualist. When you think about how Enzo ran his company and his life, he's a dictator. No 
more than his approach to business. Alfredo preferred working alone with complete autonomy 
to a joint partnership that shared risk as well as rewards. So he tells his son all the time, like don't 
have business partners. His philosophy -- I'm running over my own point here. His philosophy 
was emphasized in the business credo that he taught his son as a child and which Enzo would 
never forget. To be successful, one should not have to answer to any partner and should be 
independent.

So when the time came to create his own company, Enzo would remember what his father 
taught him. So this is a little bit more about the -- like the home environment, they were 
extremely passionate, argumentative family and that influenced Enzo's life. So they often 
argued and -- talking about his parents -- and ferociously. They argued about almost anything 
and theatrically so. By his own admission, his parents' continuous disputes and foul language 
had an impact on Enzo's own nature and the person he became.

So the book is full with anecdotes about people waiting to meet with Ferrari and they hear him 
in his office talking to somebody. He's yelling. It's a -- there was no harmony in his company. 
And I think that was by design. He loved -- not only did he want like individuals in -- within his 
company to compete with each other, which is like his own unique take on management. There 
was no -- he had no desire for harmony.

He thought like the best environments were one where like you had to argue to see who was 
correct. You had to fight. You had to make people compete. It was -- for me, it would be an 
unpleasant place to work unless I was the one running the company. But his belief is that he had 
a small group of completely dedicated, passionate, to use the term that Steve Jobs used, like A+ 
players. He would only be able to get them to reach their potential in this like war-like 
environment.

Back to his early life. And for Enzo, it was very apparent at a very young age, he hated school. 

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 3 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col
sus, LLC.



He did terrible at. He didn't -- no one would consider him to be an educated person by any 
means, but that didn't matter because he had an insane focus on work. He said Enzo would 
frankly admit to having experienced a true aversion to study, meaning he would study anything 
that -- like when it came to cars and cars racing, he knew everything because he was 
completely engrossed in that one like craft or that one trade or that one journey, whatever you 
want to call it. But anything outside of that, like if you're going to put a young Enzo and have 
him like learn stuff from a teacher that he doesn't care about, like it's not going to happen.

So we see that here. He says Enzo would frankly admit to having experienced a true aversion to 
study. When his father extorted him to study so that he might one day become an engineer, 
Enzo replied that he'd rather quit school and start working immediately, which is exactly what he 
does, by the way. So I want to talk about you're not born with a passion for racing cars, right? 
No one is. You have to find your passion. And Jeff Bezos sometimes says that passions find us. 
In Enzo's cases, that might be true.

So this is how Enzo finds his life passion. It's in 1908. He's just 10 years old, and his father takes 
him to an automobile race, the first one ever. All right. So it says, when he was 10 years old, his 
father took him to see his first automobile race. It produced an indelible spark in his heart. His 
early excitement unquestionably had the effect of kindling an internal fire in him, a passion in 
which Enzo would dedicate the rest of his life. It was there that young Enzo began to dream of 
one day becoming Ferrari.

So you got to bear with me here. I'm going to go through -- and they have some other highlights 
that come 800 pages later than where we're in the book, and it's going to illustrate what I think 
is the main point that I would learn from this book. It doesn't matter if you're building cars, if 
you're building an app, if you're building a house. Whatever it is that you do during the day, if 
you approach it with the obsessiveness of Enzo Ferrari, you will be successful at whatever you 
do.

Now it's also very hard to do because his schedule was extreme, 7 days a week, 12 to 16 hours a 
day, holidays included. That's it. Family time, no, even though he had a good relationship with his 
son who ends up dying when -- his son dies from muscular dystrophy when he was 24. It was 
actually the -- it's like the most painful thing that ever happens to Enzo obviously. It's something 
that -- he wakes up every day for the rest of his life, and every morning, he goes and visits his 
son's grave, his son's tomb.

Other than that, though, Enzo had no Again, that word total, whole, entire, full, unquestioned. 
Here's another one for you, another example of it. He confessed that he believed he possessed 
just one quality, the stubborn determination to capture the trust of those who work with me. I 
still have only 2 wishes, to be able to work until the last day of my life and to see all Italians think 
of themselves as the sons of the same mother, Italy. He was extremely nationalistic and proud 
of being Italian.

And then writing in his autobiography about his wedding, now this is a great illustration. This is a 
reflection. He's still married at the time he's writing this. I should not have married because a 
man dominated by a passion such as mine can hardly divide himself in half and be a good 
husband. If I had listened to my wife, I would have been a clerk in a bus company. And I think it's 
a question of whether he had a passion or the passion had him. And I think it might have been 
the latter. All right. So let me go back to his early life. This is when he leaves school, he fails out 
of school, starts to work, and then he has one of the largest tragedies of his life. He says, after 
failing the third class of the technical institute, his studies were over. Enzo did not return to 
school, and thanks to experience he gained in his father's workshop, he found a job at the 
machine shop of the fire department.

A couple of nights before the end of the year, Alfredo Ferrari had gone to bed with a high fever. 
Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)

Page 4 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
los

s, LLC.



It was normal bronchitis, which quickly turned into pneumonia. Within 3 days, he was dead. He 
was not quite 57 years old. With the death of his father, Enzo lost a precise reference point. A 
little over a month before his 18th birthday, Enzo was not prepared for his father's death. The 
sudden loss of his father was the first great sorrow in Enzo Ferrari's life, the first of many and 
perhaps the only that began to -- excuse me, and perhaps the one that began to shape the man 
he would become. The memories not only of his father but also of sudden death would never 
abandon him.

Before the year ended, however, Enzo would be devastated by a second tragedy. His brother, 
Dino, died, too. So his son's named after him. After a year of war, he had contracted pneumonia, 
which, due to the precarious conditions in which soldiers lived, had quickly killed him. He was 
just 20 years old. In less than 12 months, Enzo's Life had been turned upside down. Father and 
brother were gone. The sudden death of his father had put at risk the welfare of the Ferrari 
family who certainly could not live off the small salary that Enzo was earning.

So now I want to tell you about one of the most important moments in his life. Okay? His 
brother's dead. His dad's dead. They have little money. His -- eventually Alfredo's workshop gets 
closed down completely. And so he has to travel to the larger city of Turin, and he's trying to get 
a job. He's obsessed with cars still. So he wants to work for the most successful car 
manufacturer at the time, which was Fiat.

And you have to remember this part of his life for the end of the podcast. It's one of the most 
important things that ever happens to Enzo. He tries to get a job. He gets a job interview. He 
says, Enzo had sincerely, though somewhat naively, hoped to find a job at Fiat, but their 
negative answer left him distraught. He had no money, no job, and no intention of going back to 
Modena. That's the little city he lived in.

He was overwhelmed. He brushed the snow off of a park bench, sat down and wept. It was a 
rare moment of true despair in his life. He was determined not to give up. This is the lowest 
point of Enzo Ferrari's life, of his young life, outside of obviously the death of his son. His family 
is dead. He has no job. He has no money. He has no connections. And yet this -- where we're at 
in the story -- this young desperate person will not give up.

It's from this moment in his life that he starts the climb to build Ferrari. So he winds up getting a 
job. He's got an acquaintance of his father in Turin. It's not at Fiat. It's at this tiny, little repair 
shop, and it's a guy named Giovanni that gives him the job. So he says after the 
disappointments and hardships of the first 2 months in Turin, the modest salary Giovanni gave 
him provided Enzo with enough money to eat.

So it is from this low point in his life that he starts the gradual step, the gradual climb to 
eventually build Ferrari. So he starts out broke, alone, poor on a snowy park bench. And the first 
step up, okay, I'll just work at this workshop. And what he is, he's just like every single other 
person that I've ever covered, he's extremely resourceful. He just takes one opportunity, waits -- 
does the best of his ability with that opportunity, then waits until that eventually -- inevitably, I 
would say, opens up another opportunity. Then he takes that next step. Then he does -- he 
repeats this process over and over again, and he does this over -- in an extremely long period of 
time.

It's important to note, Ferrari, the way we think about it, the car manufacturer, the one that's 
owned by Enzo Ferrari, that is 40 years in the making. He does not found Ferrari until he was 
around, I would say, 42, somewhere in there, maybe 45 years old, maybe even 48 years old. I 
can't remember the exact. But he's in his 40s by the time he founds the company. That is why 
he's revered and most well-known today.

But the important part of the reason I'm telling you all this is because where I'm focusing on is 

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 5 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



the steps he had to go through before he gets to that position because every opportunity, 
every experience that he went through was preparing him for the day to be able to found the 
company Ferrari. So his first love is racing. Now he realizes to -- that the key to winning races is 
to building the best cars, and so that is the byproduct that leads us to Ferrari, the car company. 
But he doesn't start out with the best cars. In fact, he starts racing with whatever he can get.

Becoming The Best Racecar Driver
So this is his financial situation when he starts racing. He had to pledge a month's worth of 
salary as collateral to get a car. And so whereas Ferrari starting out this climb to build the Ferrari 
company or the journey that eventually leads there, all of his possessions amounted to no more 
than 450 Lira. So it's not a lot of money at all. So this is Enzo showing his resourcefulness in 
acquiring a better racecar, so what he would do? The same thing he's doing in racing is what he 
does in life. Okay. So I'll just take whatever opportunity I can get. Okay. This is a c***** race car, 
I'm going to race -- I'm going to do the best job driving this car as I can. And then when I have 
limited success with that, I'm going to try to trade up into a slightly better car. And then I'm 
going to do the same thing over and over. Okay. Now I've gotten to a different position. Now I'm 
going to try to get a slightly better car.

So this is him showing his resourcefulness in acquiring a better race car. It says it was indeed a 
powerful car, but it was also 7 years old, having been produced in 1913. Enzo knew that soon car 
manufacturers would put out new racing cars and all the pre-war units would become obsolete. 
Enzo uses his best charm. After some negotiations based on the assumption that soon this car 
would no longer find any potential buyers -- he was a master salesperson -- he persuaded the 
car manufacturer to essentially swap cars with him. And so all this time, Enzo's racing, let's call 
them, like small regional companies. I don't think you'd ever recognize the brand name. There's a 
lot of brand names that you'll recognize in this book at this time because, remember, Enzo said 
that the small area where he came from, did a special psychosis, I think, is the word he used for 
car racing.

And so he's learning that he's going to -- he eventually has to work himself into -- if he wants to 
be a racecar driver, which is what he wants to do because now he's around 20 years old, right, 
he realizes that he's got to expose himself to opportunities to get the best cars in the world. 
And this is how he comes to that. He has a race. He does well, but he winds up losing. He said 
he also learned something that he would never forget for the rest of his life. Not even the best 
driver had any chance of victory if he was not at the wheel of the best car. And it didn't take 
them long to realize that the best cars available were being produced in Milan by Alfa Romeo.

So that's a brand that's still around. Maserati's around at this time; Ferrari, of course. So now he's 
going to work himself into the position to go to Milan and to try to race Alfa Romeos. Now 
there's 2 things happening in this paragraph that I thought about though, this idea that he 
realized, "Oh, wow, like if I don't have the best car, I can't win races."

I think that's why he goes on in his life, like that influenced him later in his life to make the best 
possible car. And you see this, too, because when the -- his -- inevitably, Ferrari becomes the 
most successful racing team in history. Okay? And when he's winning all these races, like he was 
very not -- he's not rude to drivers, but if -- he was obviously an obsessive. So if the race was 
won is because the car won the race. If the race was lost, it was the driver's fault. So this gives 
you kind of an insight into who we're dealing with here. So now I want to go into a little bit of his 
personality, and I want to talk about his first business, his first entrepreneurial activity, which a 
lot of people don't even know ever happened.

This reminded me -- when I was reading this part, this reminded me of Walt Disney because 

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 6 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col
sus, LLC.



everybody knows the company Walt Disney eventually built. Everybody knows the company 
that Enzo Ferrari eventually builds. What they don't know is that by the time Walt Disney was 21, 
22, somewhere or another, his first company in, I think, it was, St. Louis, Missouri went bankrupt. 
And then he moves out to California and does a second act, and that's the company we all know 
and love today.

This is exactly what happens to Enzo Ferrari. His first company goes bankrupt, and that failure 
was so embarrassing to him, to Enzo that it's something that he had a fear for the rest of his life, 
and he worked so hard to avoid. He winds up successfully avoiding this fate. So let me go into 
his personality, and I'll tell you about that first business that he starts. The key factors were 
Enzo's perseverance, a stubborn faith in himself. How many times is this booking going to use 
the word stubborn? If I had to guess, this probably describes Enzo in a -- like describing his 
stubborn behavior, I don't know, 50-plus times.

A stubborn faith in himself and an insatiable thirst for success, not simply in motor racing but in 
life, these are all qualities that would never abandon Enzo, eventually shaping him into the 
automotive giant he became. Enzo opened -- okay. So this is going to be hard for me to 
pronounce, let's call it Emilia because that's -- the first word is something else, Carrozzeria or 
something like that. So let's call it Emilia. Enzo opened Emilia, his first entrepreneur activity. On 
the one hand, Emilia was the most obvious of things, a CMN showroom. So this is one of the 
small regional car manufacturers I was telling you about.

A CMN showroom but, on the other hand, and this was Enzo's grand plan, it was an independent 
coach builder, which is like the -- think of that as like -- it's almost -- at this time in history, 
putting together a car was almost like putting together a computer early in the days, where like 
they might sell you a piece and you have to put them together. So maybe they give you the 
board and you have to figure out the monitor, whatever the case is. Like he wasn't 
manufacturing engines yet. He was manufacturing like the exterior of the car. All right. So it 
continues. It says, for in addition to selling CMN models and repairing and repainting cars of any 
brand, he planned to build bodies for those customers who bought chassis, radiator, hood and 
dashboard from car manufacturers and then counted upon one of the many coachbuilders to 
complete the car.

The idea was not revolutionary, of course, since it was precisely what this -- another company 
did in Milan. But it was a demonstration that Enzo was learning fast and eager to expand his 
horizons. His mother had been against this bold move. Like many people in those days, she still 
did not understand the enormous potential of the automobile. And I think that's an important 
part, too, that no one can really teach you. And that's like how do you -- how are you able to see 
an opportunity way before anybody else does? So now everybody sees how large the 
automobile industry. In the early 1900s, only a select few of people realize how massive this 
could actually get. Enzo Ferrari was one of them.

We also saw this a few weeks ago with the podcast I did on James J. Hill. Nobody really saw the 
opportunity that a well-run and well-built regional railroad would -- like the economic 
opportunity that could provide. In that book, it talks about like he'd mentioned it to friends 
hundreds of times over the years before he's able to actually do it. Like he was completely 
convinced that this opportunity was just hiding in plain sight, is very similar to what Enzo's 
doing here. I'm going to skip ahead. This is -- this business is going to fail. It's going to go 
bankrupt. They have to sell off the small positions they have to pay off creditors. It says the 
humiliation of this colossal failure and the embarrassment he felt would serve as a fundamental 
lesson in the life of Enzo Ferrari.

If it is true that negative experiences often teach us more than positive ones, this disaster of his 
first entrepreneurial experiment, which he never forgot, is the key to the future success of the 

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 7 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ss

s, LLC.



man and the company he would one day create. And then his next step -- what he does, his next 
step is really, really smart. And it's very -- it's similar to what we're doing here. He gets a job at 
Alfa Romeo and this is why. Thus, he became better acquainted with the company's 
management. Enzo tried to glean as much knowledge as possible from these experienced men 
in order to avoid a future repetition of his failed business. So he meets all these really successful 
older racecar drivers, people working in the car industry. And really to understand, Enzo, he's like 
-- he's a learning machine. And he really was intentional about learning from those who had 
already accomplished what he wanted to do. And they had an influence on him.

One of them is this guy named Antonio Ascari. But I'm just going to read this paragraph to you. 
I'll get there in a minute. Growing up at the school of a superstar like Antonio Ascari or of artists 
like Sivocci and a strong champion like Campari, Ferrari now had been able to perfect his own 
style. And since he is tough and animated by a strong will to succeed, no goal is precluded to 
him. Now this period in his life is extremely important because he makes a lot of progress in a 
short amount of time. I'm going to read. We're skipping ahead a few years, but this one 
paragraph is going to give you an idea of what has occurred.

He was about to turn 26 and could rightly be proud of what he had achieved in the short span of 
5 years. He was one of the most prominent Italian sportsmen, one of Alfa Corse's top racing 
drivers, the right-hand man of Alfa Romeo's commercial director and the owner of a car 
dealership in his hometown. So he had to do all that in steps. The first thing, you have to get 
good at racing cars. And he got really good at racing cars and eventually gets promoted up to a 
team. It's called Alpha Corse. They race for Alfa Romeo.

And then once you become one of the top racing drivers, which he certainly was at this point in 
his life, what was very common is because these races get so much publicity and press, is a lot 
of the drivers would then start like, let's call them, like little franchises of their own car dealers 
because like, "Oh, I know Enzo Ferrari. I saw him race at this race. I want to buy my car from him." 
And so he winds up having, I don't know, like 2 or 3 of these things spread in little towns 
throughout Italy, as did -- very common for like other race drivers to do this as well.

So in this course of 5 years, he's worked himself into a nice position. He's still not where he 
wants to be, but he does smart things along the way. Okay? And he's not in control. Remember, 
he becomes a dictator because he's obsessed with -- he wants to control what he does with his 
time. He wants to be the one making decisions. He wants to make -- like be the one building the 
cars. He wants to be the one selecting the driver. He wants to do everything, right?

He's not there yet. But to get there, eventually work himself in that position, he does something 
very smart. So let me just read the sentence, and then I'll read a note, like my interpretation of 
what's happening in the book at this time. It says just when Enzo is beginning to digest a painful 
exclusion, Alfa Romeo's decision to not count him as one of its drivers for the Grand Prix 
program, this big opportunity came knocking on his door. The Alfa Romeo management knew 
what they were doing. Although Enzo had lately been more useful to them off the track, his 
racing talent was familiar to all. So that's what they were talking about. He becomes the right-
hand man of one of the directors of Alfa Romeo. So what's happening here?

Even when he's not called on to race, which is his real goal, right, at this time in his life, he does 
the best possible job of whatever the task is. So they ask him to be part of the pit crew. Okay. 
I'm going to do that, but I'm going to do the best d*** job I can at the pit crew. They asked him 
to recruit engineers to the company, even though he doesn't own the company. He goes and 
does that. I'm going to do the best -- I'm going to be the best recruiter possible. Do you want 
me to attend an auto show? It's not even a race. It's like auto shows they have to this day, where 
they -- manufacturers show off their new models. You want to go there and maybe talk about 
the product and talk to potential customers? I'll go do that. In other words, the reason now he 

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 8 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
os us, LLC.



has this opportunity is because he's always focusing on being useful.

Now I'm skipping ahead. This is very interesting because his main goal in life was to be the 
greatest racing driver, right? And then he's doing okay at it. He's a very respectable driver, has 
some success, but he realizes he can never be the best. And this is also the problem with 
competing and -- the reason I think entrepreneurship is so great as opposed to like sports or 
racecars or anything like that is because it's positive sum.

You can succeed. I can succeed. Tons of other businesses can all succeed at the same time. In 
racing or in athletics or any case, it's usually zero sum. It's -- there's one area and everybody else 
has to wait until next year. This is when we start to see like his own -- he's coming to the 
realization, "Oh my god, I'm not as talented. I can never be as talented to beat the greats. What 
am I going to do?" And I think these doubts that he's experiencing right now as a young man will 
eventually lead him to find -- lead him to what he actually can be the best at.

He knew he did not possess -- there's another driver. Let's skip his name. He knew he did not 
possess his talent. And he had realized long ago that his love for the car, which led him to 
respect her in a race rather than abusing her, as his teammates did, would never allow him to 
make that final step, the one that separated great drivers from champions. These doubts of not 
being able to be like them had been on his mind for a long time. So now he knows, okay, I have 
this passion. I have this love, something I've been obsessed for the -- since a child, but I'll never 
be the best in the world at it. So what should I do?

And so that's when he starts to focus his talents and his determination on commercial interest, 
where he starts becoming, in other words, an entrepreneur. So he has all these businesses that I 
told you about, these car dealerships and the like and as an example of his determination to not 
let another business fail and knowing that he's doing too much. So he knows he will fail if he 
doesn't focus on one goal, right? And this is causing -- this is going to cause -- so he's 
tormented here that what I'm about to read you is going to cause a lot of discomfort and pain in 
his life. It says Enzo needed time to think about what he want to do in his life. Races were an 
important component of his existence but no longer the only one. Working with Rimini -- Rimini 
is the executive of Alfa Romeo that he's learning a lot from. He becomes Rimini's right-hand 
man.

Working with Rimini, contributing to the development of cars were all things that possess an 
undeniable appeal for Enzo. The role of technical and commercial adviser to Rimini would allow 
him to remain in an environment that he loved, which is he's not racing cars, but he's still 
involved with the team, but would, at the same time, give him the opportunity to devote more 
energy to the entrepreneurial activity as a representative of Alfa Romeo, so it's the car 
dealerships I told you about.

In his -- in this state of mind, crowded with too many ideas often conflicting with each other -- I 
think a lot of entrepreneurs have been there. So this is very common -- Enzo was on the verge 
of a nervous breakdown. He was about to collapse, the tensions, considerations and doubts, the 
haunting memories, fears and concerns along with his huge responsibilities were now -- were by 
now an intolerable burden.

He vacillated in his thinking about retiring from racing. He knew the issue needed to be decided 
once and for all. He couldn't stand another 2.5 months in this state. So what's happening? He's 
making the transition here, and it's a painful one for him. He's giving up on his original dream to 
be the best race car driver and realizing, hey, I'm not -- I can't achieve this dream.

And that's extremely painful for somebody to go through. And yet he also shows the other 
resourceful aspect of his personality, where he was like, okay, well, maybe there's some 
positives in here. I have a lot of relationships. I'm selling cars. I'm involved with the racing team. 

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 9 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssus, LLC.



I'm developing new cars. Why don't I follow this path and see where this can lead? And that's an 
important decision because that -- without making that decision, there is no Ferrari today. But 
because he went through this -- that's my whole point I'm trying to get across. It's like there is 
no Ferrari unless he goes through all these trials and tribulations.

And he makes the decisions -- when you're -- everybody is affected in their life at times where 
you have -- get to choose between 1 or 2 or even more different decisions. And it's extremely 
nerve-racking because it's not at all obvious. And yet you know each decision that -- each 
opportunity that you have is going to lead to a vastly different place in your life. So how do you 
go about making that decision? And even if you have an idea of where you want to go, there's 
usually this inner turmoil, this like emotional conflict that we see in these life stories. And so 
that's going to transition to us the life of Enzo Ferrari in his 30s. In his 20s -- end of his teenage 
years and his 20s, he's pursuing full force the passion of racing. And as he gets to transition to 
his 30s, he's like, okay, now I'm going full force in the business.

And the same drive and dedication and obsessiveness that I approach racing with, now I'm 
going to approach my entrepreneurial activity with. And so we get an idea of Enzo's schedule at 
31 years old, and he says, he was 31 years old with a body that was not really athletic and a 
profession that saw him in constant motion. In the morning, he regularly got up before sunrise 
to get to any of the cities in the 3 regions he ran by the time the people he was meeting arrived 
at work. So he had car dealerships in 3 different cities in Italy. He usually skipped lunch to travel 
to another city or to meet another client. By late afternoon, he was back in Bologna to make 
sure that everything proceeded in his branch office.

Start of Scuderia Ferrari
Then he would return to Modena where he checked out the workshop to ensure that the day's 
work had been carried out, this, day after day, week after week, month after month. During the 
weekends, he often went to events scattered all over Italy, where, although he rarely raced in 
person, he kept busy strengthening existing relationships and forging new ones. And it was why 
he was pursuing all these other opportunities so diligently that he -- there's an opening that's 
left for him. So the note I left myself was the large leave gaps for the small. This is the start of 
Scuderia Ferrari, sorry. I'm probably still pronouncing that incorrectly, but it's still in existence to 
today. It's a racing team. It's the most successful racing team in history, and it's a business step 
Ferrari's starting, right?

It's the business of being a racing team. And the reason we spend so much time on this is 
because essentially the same decisions he's making here, in about a decade from now, where 
we're at in the story, he does those exact same decisions, except for himself, for starting the 
Ferrari racing team because right now, he's going to start a racing team for Alfa Romeo, right? 
It's soon going to be called Scuderia Ferrari. Eventually, it's going to transition from racing Alfa 
Romeos to racing his own cars. This is an extremely important part of his life to understand who 
Enzo Ferrari was and how he thought about business.

All right. It says Ferrari, for whom racing was both a source of personal reward and income 
earned from the cars he sold to a generation of rich men looking for a different class of thrill, 
shared the same doubts and uncertainties about the future of motor racing. So what they're 
talking about is these are very precarious times in Italian history, and there's a lot of Italian car 
manufacturers that are pulling out of racing, right? And in Alfa Romeo's case, they kind of get 
nationalized by the fascist Mussolini government. Okay? So sometimes, these car 
manufacturers say, okay, racing's getting too expensive and it's too like -- it's a distraction, so 
we're going to pull out of that.

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 10 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lossus, LLC.



So when they pull out, that gap leaves an opportunity for small people like Ferrari. He was like, 
oh, well, you don't want to run a racing team. But what if I run a racing team, right? I'll own the 
team. You'll have a small investment in it, but I'll use your cars because you'll get the promotion. 
When I win, it's going to look great for your team -- or for your cars. And when I lose, I'll take all 
the blame. So that's what Ferrari is doing here. But typically, in the general distress, he also saw 
an opportunity and quickly seized the moment.

If automobile manufacturers were reducing their investments and participation, the moment 
could be ripe, Ferrari said, for a larger role to be played by Scuderia, private and normally small-
scale racing teams that had already been operating, if not, flourishing in the 1920s. He, for one, 
was ready to take up where manufacturers like Fiat and Alfa Romeo had left off. Enzo Ferrari's 
reputation for organization possibly was matched only by his charm when it came to persuading 
an interested audience.

Remember at the beginning of the book, we talked about the fact that he had a charisma that 
anybody that came across him had a hard time resisting. He uses that to his benefit. He 
anticipated possible reservations on the feasibility of the project and volunteered that the 
direct involvement of Alfa Romeo in the new racing team was a prerequisite.

So he said, listen, I have an idea. I could take over the racing, but I can't do it alone. I got to go 
out and convince the people at Alfa Romeo to let me do this. And then he also has to go out and 
convince all the other car companies -- like things he needs for his car, like tires, for example. He 
has to go out and he has to convince Pirelli to support him. And he has to go out and basically 
organize all this and get everybody to agree before it can actually form. So now we jump to 
when he's having the meeting to talk Alfa Romeo into this. It says he saved the knockout punch 
for last. By having his racing team enter their cars, he said, if they won, it was Alfa Romeo that 
won; and if they were defeated, the burden would be borne by his Scuderia.

He offered shares in his new racing team in exchange for first-rate technical assistance and 
demonstrated high-standard logistics support. So basically, he caps their downside and leaves 
their upside unlimited, right? That's a smart move. Alfa Romeo agreed to take part in this new 
racing activity promoted by their sales agent. He -- remember, he -- it also works as an 
opportunity because they have a business relationship with him. He's been selling -- he has 
dealerships. He's been selling their cars for many years. They know who this guy is.

So it says they agreed to take part in this new racing activity, who's promoted by their sales 
agent, a brilliant 31-year-old part-time driver with ambitions that clearly went full circle. They 
would not take more than 5% of the new company stakes. With all that, this meant -- that's a 
weird sentence -- first and foremost was direct access to purchasing the best material available 
for motor racing. So he needs priority access to parts and to -- like to the new designs of their 
racecars. So he was actually also doing it for his own interests.

He's like, I'm going to race for you, but that means you also have to agree to give me the best 
technology you guys are developing because they develop -- essentially, every year, they make 
their previous racecars -- the previous year's racecars obsolete. So like as long as you're giving 
me the best technical products that you have, I will win races for you.

So I want to go and talk to you a little bit more about how his -- how Scuderia Ferrari was 
organized at the very beginning. Again, this is important to realize because he does very similar 
things when he's starting the car company, Ferrari. So he says, having won over Alfa Romeo, he 
had to complete the operation by involving tire manufacturer Pirelli in the adventure. As with 
Alfa Romeo, Enzo was not so much in search of capital for that would be provided by his 
wealthy gentlemen driver partners.

Okay. I got to pause right there. Remember, I told you that he made it a point to study and learn 

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 11 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssus, LLC.



from people that already accomplished what he wanted to do. One of these was this racecar 
driver named Ascari. So not only -- he's a couple of years older than Ferrari. What does he do? 
Ascari goes out and wins -- starts to win races, so then Ascari opens car dealerships. Ferrari 
wins races. Then he opens car dealerships like Ascari.

Then Ascari starts his own race team. Ferrari starts his own race team. He essentially copies this 
guy, and he talks about Ascari for the rest of his life. That's the influence that -- because Ascari 
is going to die in a few years from now in a race. He dies early. He's like 36 years old, something 
like that.

So anyways, something else that he stole and learned from Ascari was everybody else started a 
racing team and they had to like rely on the support of -- financial support of car manufacturers, 
right? But Ascari was like, well, that doesn't make sense because they change their mind from 
year to year. Some years, they'll give you full financial support. Some years, they'll say, hey, we're 
diverting resources elsewhere and you're kind of screwed. So they're -- these racing teams are 
opening up and closing. It's like the whims of these large companies. It's not a good place to be, 
right?

So what Ascari realizes is like, well, the people are buying the cars from me. Like you have pro 
race drivers and then right under that, you have really rich guys in Italy and I guess, all over the 
world at this point, that buy the cars from them. And then they enter -- they're like weekend 
warriors, to think of it like that. They want to race, but they're not going to do it full time. And so 
what Ascari realized and then what Ferrari is going to copy is like, hey, you guys have a lot of 
money. You guys have a passion and you want to support racing. Why don't you -- why don't we 
start our own team, and I'll run the team, and you foot the bill since you guys are already rich 
and you're interested in this anyways?

So Ascari is the first one to crack this code where the people were like, hey, I love this so much. 
I'm willing -- I want to essentially be an owner of a race car team. What Ferrari does is like I'm 
going to copy Ascari. I'm going to -- I have -- just like he has a bunch of clients that are really 
rich and are passionate about racing, I'll go to my really rich clients and say, hey, I'm going to run 
my own race team. Do you want to support it? And not only do you financially support it, but I'll 
let you race in some of the races. It's a really smart move, what he's doing here. He's just really, 
really -- this is what I mean about like people -- a lot of times, people confuse education with 
intelligence, and they're 2 truly opposite things. Enzo was not educated, but he's extremely 
intelligent. He's extremely intelligent to one thing, and that's all -- you only need to be extremely 
intelligent on one thing in your life.

And you can have a vastly successful like outlier size success in your life. You just got to get 
good at one thing and dedicate your time and effort to it. That's why entrepreneurship was one 
of the best things in the world. All right. Let's go back to this. Okay. So Enzo was not so much in 
search of capital, meaning from Alfa Romeo or Pirelli, although they got a little bit of money. But 
-- because that would be provided by his wealthy gentlemen driver partners who were far more 
inclined to risk their own money than established companies were. He was more interested in 
making Pirelli part of the game much as he had done with Alfa Romeo in order to gain direct 
access to a tire supplier with a precise interest in serving his Scuderia as best as it could.

He's doing the same thing. I want your best products. Give me your best products. When I win 
races, it'll be like, look, I won races on Pirelli tires. It's very -- like he understood human nature. 
He was a master at understanding human nature. He's like I'm aligning my interests. You have no 
downside. Give me your tires. It costs you almost nothing. And then when inevitably I go on to 
win races, this is going to make you look really good.

Who's not going to take that deal? They're all going to take that deal. Though a minority partner 
of the company, Enzo was, without question, the central person of the whole endeavor, the 

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 12 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
los us, LLC.



originator and the brains of the operation, the energy behind the future activity and the -- 
Scuderia's assurance of success. So I'm going to read that to you again. What does that mean? 
Most of the people financing it, they get all the shares. He gets -- I forgot what percentage it 
was. Alfa Romeo, Pirelli, these other guys, they get -- let's say that he's given everybody else 5% 
of shares. Maybe he keeps 15%, 20% to himself. The vast majority is owned by the people 
financing it, which eventually they get -- that changes, and they get bought out later on.

But I want to read this to you again because the same way his Scuderia is organized is how he 
ran his company, even though he wasn't -- he's not a minority partner in Ferrari. He's a minority 
partner in this because he doesn't have a lot of assets at this time. When he does have assets, 
he controls everything until he sells to Fiat later on. So it says, Enzo is, without question, the 
central person of the whole endeavor. Same true for -- that's going to hold true for his car 
company. The originator and the brains of the operation, the energy behind the future activity 
and the assurance of success.

And so now we see this completely dedicated Enzo that he basically maintains this level of 
focus for the rest of his life. Here's a little bit of illustration of that in his own words. He says -- 
he would write that a man dominated by a passion like mine with the risks, with the time it 
requires, cannot be a good husband and above all, cannot be a good father. In other words, he 
knows the trade-off that he's making, work over family. That's the trade-off that Enzo made in 
his life.

And it was also around this time that we start to see like the black-and-white approach that 
Ferrari had. If you were working with him towards his goal, you were an associate. You were 
inside. You were good. The minute -- even after years of service, the minute that he felt that you 
were no longer dedicated to his goal, you were dead, you're just dead to him. And so this is what 
an associate was to Enzo Ferrari. Associates was the word that hence forth, in Enzo Ferrari's 
lexicon, would indicate those who inside or outside of his business worked for his team's 
success. So if you did that, you were on his good side. But the minute -- you could work for him 
for 20 years. The minute you stopped working for his goal, you'd be replaced. He was 
unbelievably ruthless.

So this is how Enzo Ferrari's described at 33 years old. This is from a -- like an industry magazine. 
It says, Ferrari was enjoying the reputation of an excellent businessman. When he raced, he 
ended up earning good money. Now that he races less, he still finds a way to make money. So 
they're picking up on the fact that most racers, like they stop racing, they -- if they didn't make 
a lot of money, they don't know what to do next. Ferrari didn't have that problem transitioning. 
So they asked is he lucky, and the answer is no. He's skilled, but he's a balanced tactician. He's 
shrewd, and he's energetic all the time. He's a man who knows what he wants. He's a real 
organizer. He's a -- this is such a weird sentence, but I think it's pretty good -- a practical value 
increaser of his abilities.

He's a champion who never goes off the road, as one who goes off the road, never ends up the 
manager and the businessman. And all while he's doing this, he does something really smart. He 
makes himself indispensable. So this is the role that Ferrari creates for himself. So he's getting 
into this beef with one of his drivers who was this really big star, and the driver was like I'm the 
most important part in -- and he didn't understand how important Ferrari had become. And so 
this is a good description of that. The driver had understood little or nothing. That was a rule 
that Enzo Ferrari had carved out for himself 4 years earlier, always in precarious but profitable 
equilibrium between the changing plans of Alfa Romeo, drivers' extravagances, technical 
supplier needs, race organizers' demands, sponsor requests -- sponsors' requests and pressure 
from the press.

And it was the proof that Enzo Ferrari's role was of such paramount importance, has to be 

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 13 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssus, LLC.



difficult to define and to understand. And it's during this time of wild success that we see one of 
his most known and, I would say, most liked traits. And essentially, Enzo Ferrari is telling us by -- 
if you look at his behavior or his actions, not to rest on your laurels. So it says it had been a 
month of enormous satisfaction for Ferrari, 8 races, 7 wins, but the mind of Ferrari was typically 
already onto the next race. He'd celebrate for maybe an hour maybe that day and then 
completely forget it and go to the next one.

A few pages later, another note I left myself, reminded me of Jeff Bezos. For Enzo Ferrari, it is 
always day one. And it says, it implied above all a very personal attitude that Ferrari had begun 
to adopt when contemplating the achievements of his working life, where each victory or 
accomplishment was only the starting point for the next. Okay. So I'm skipping ahead.

Starting Own Race Team
He's going to run Scuderia Ferrari for many years. So it's, what, eight years, I think, before Alfa 
Romeo was going to pull the plug because even though he owns the company, he owns part of 
the company, he's running the company, he still relies on Alfa Romeo for a lot of like the cars 
and the technical assistance. And so this is going to be the last straw or the last thing that has 
to happen to Ferrari till he eventually never -- after this is going to happen, after Alfa pulls out 
and the Scuderia is shelved temporarily, closed down, this is the last time in his life that he's 
ever going to rely on anybody else.

Okay. So it says from one day to the next, Scuderia Ferrari disappeared. For Enzo Ferrari, who 
had invested 8 years of his life in the Scuderia with all the physical and mental energy he could 
muster, it was a bitter day. In eight years, Scuderia Ferrari had participated in 225 races with a 
total of 1,715 cars. It had obtained 144 victories and 171 podium finishes. It had played an 
important part in European motorsports and had, for a long time, shaped the Italian racing 
environment. Now it was being shut down without any public word of gratitude. The only 
satisfaction Enzo received was that it had made him rich.

Okay. So one thing -- or two things here. Other people were like, "Oh, what Enzo's doing is not 
that hard. I'm going start my own race team." The important part is he's winning all these races 
and he's doing so profitably. There's tons of other people that saw what Enzo was doing, tried to 
emulate it, and then they didn't have his like organization and management skill. And they would 
start losing money, eventually go into the red, and then they'd go out of business, right? And 
then the second thing is it's being pulled because we're in the time of history, we're in like the 
1930s, let's say, mid- to late 1930s. Essentially, Alfa Romeo becomes state run for all intents and 
purposes, and their decision-making at the top is like erratic, right? We're about to jump off with 
the largest war in history.

This is what's happening here, where they have new people in positions of leadership that are 
put there by the government in Alfa Romeo that are ones pulling the plug on this. So it is 
important that, hey, now that Enzo had to go through this, because it gave him enough money 
and enough resolve, where he's like, "I have enough money. I'm just going to fund my own thing. 
And now I'm going to revive the Scuderia, and then I'm going to start making my own cars." So 
this is an extremely important part of his life.

It says the liquidation of the Scuderia, in fact, provided him with more than 1 million Lira, goes 
into like all his assets. I'll skip that part. He also gets a job. So this is kind of the way big 
bureaucracies work. It's weird. It's like, oh, we're spending too much time and attention over 
here, so we're going to liquidate this, but then we're going to give you -- essentially, they just -- 
they give him -- they overpay him.

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 14 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lo

sus, LLC.



So he gets money from the liquidation, and it says, at the same time, Enzo was named Head of 
Alfa Corse, a new department that he would help create. And so this is working essentially for 
the large corporation of Alfa Romeo. Giving up his independence must have cost him a lot even 
from the point of view of personal pride. But in addition to the millionaire settlement he 
received, from this point forward, Alfa Romeo would pay him a stunning salary, 190,000 Lira a 
year.

So at the time, to put it into context, like a typical labor would make, let's say, 1,000 Lira a 
month, and he's making 16,000 Lira. And it's kind of -- how would I put this? It's -- he's getting 
paid and he has duties, but then they say you never have to show up. So he's kind of like I don't 
know if that's called golden handcuffs or whatever the term is, but essentially, like he's got a 
high-paying job for a job he doesn't really have to do much for.

But he doesn't care about -- again, it's not just the money. For him, he's like he had a passion. He 
doesn't want to stop doing that. So now we turn to a very important paragraph in the book and 
a very important time in his life. In the winter of 1938, the personal future of Enzo Ferrari was a 
difficult puzzle to decipher. In some ways, the previous eight years had been annulled. On 
February 18, he turned 40, an age at which a man could begin to see his life in some perspective 
or at least a part of it.

And if on one hand, he could be proud of what he had done, which he certainly should have, 
right, on the other, he couldn't help but realize that the past 18 years had been wiped out by an 
irrational decision that had little or nothing to do with motor racing. So that's what I was 
referencing earlier, how a lot of the decisions are being made by people -- not people in 
business, they're people in government. And unfortunately, one of those casualties of these 
irrational decisions was the original Scuderia Ferrari.

Okay. So right around this time, he's like, "I'm rich and I'm still passionate. I'm 40. I have a lot 
more work to do. Like I'm just essentially getting started. And that's the kind of -- the message I 
want to send to you, is like everybody thinks like, oh, I want to build a company. I think it's going 
to happen overnight. Ferrari had to go through multiple decades to learn -- to become the 
person qualified enough to build what eventually becomes Ferrari. That's why he said he was 
eventually becoming Ferrari because the man and the company were kind of inseparable. But 
you can't just wake up in a day and think you're going to do that. He had to go through all these 
experiences because, through his experiences, he was gaining knowledge, the knowledge that 
he needed to build the products that he eventually would build and to build a company 
eventually he would build, the one that's still in existence to this day.

His son, he had -- so his son, Dino, dies at 24. He has a son with his mistress that no one really 
knows about. His son, to this day, his son winds up becoming a billionaire because he owns 10% 
of Ferrari. Ferrari sells 50% to Fiat and then made a deal, when he dies, that Fiat can buy the 
other 40%, but the other 10% has to go to his son. And just having 10% of the company has 
made his son a billionaire. It's amazing. This is his state of mind when he founds Ferrari. At 42, 
Ferrari wanted to persuade the outside world that the degree of celebrity -- this is his own 
words -- that the degree of celebrity that I had achieved was the legitimate consequence of my 
years -- here's that word again -- of my stubborn work and of my attitudes.

In essence, he concluded, it was time to show how far I can get on my own. In establishing a 
new company, Enzo remembered what he had learned from his father, and he did not look for 
any partner. When he had founded Scuderia Ferrari 10 years earlier, his financial situation had 
prevented him from being the only shareholder. Now, however, he was in the position of being 
able to go in alone. And we've seen similar situations. I mean the history of business, the history 
of entrepreneurship is scattered with examples like this, where you have to work yourself in a 
position to where you can have complete control and you can be the #1 person in charge.

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 15 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
los us, LLC.



My mind immediately goes to James Dyson, who spent 14 years. By the time he rips open the 
Hoover vacuum and is frustrated to the time he has a prototype and that he owns 100% -- he 
went through like 5,127 prototypes in 14 years. Now he had partners in between that. He had 
other companies, but the Dyson that he still owns to this day, the one that has made him a 
billionaire many times over, the one that produces some of the best products in the world, it 
took 14 years and many failed partnerships to get to that point.

Same thing for Ferrari here. Now -- so he said he has this goal at 40, still working at 42. It's not 
till he's at 48 years old until he realizes it because he's sidetracked by World War II. So I'm going 
to skip over a lot of the stuff on World War II. I mean, listen, the book is almost 1,000 pages long. 
I'm leaving a lot out, and it's a fascinating read, although it takes a freaking long time to read. So 
I have to skip over this.

He has to stop producing cars. The war -- for the war, he has to make like machines. They're like 
hydraulic machines that are used to make ball bearings, and then his factory is bombed by the 
Allieds. And so I'm going to skip over all that because I'm almost at where I want -- I'm almost at 
the most -- what I feel is the most important part of his life. But first, I want to tell you that 
there's also elements to his personality that have nothing to do with car racing. And the fact 
that he did do his -- tried to do his best to help others during the war -- this is one of the, if not, 
the greatest tragedy in the -- all of human history, World War II.

And he's living in a country that people are being killed just for their religion or their race. In 
addition to the resistance, Ferrari had also helped the Jews, even more concretely than he had 
helped his friend, Levi, before the war. Specifically, he hid a Polish woman and her three children 
from the Germans in a barn located on the plains between the city and the hills, personally 
taking care of the four fugitives. He quietly fed and clothed them until the end of the war out of 
his own pocket, risking his own life.

So it's an insight into his personality that when he thought something was the right thing to do, 
he not only risked his own money, but if he were to get caught doing that, they would have 
killed him. And there was even rumors that because he wasn't playing ball with the Mussolini 
government that there was a discussion whether they should kill Ferrari or not, and then they 
decided not to.

Okay. So now the war ends, and after the war, Enzo is able to focus on his main goal. Enzo -- so 
this is now production -- he could resume production and he had to wait all the way until 
mid-1946. It says, Enzo Ferrari did not waste much time before deciding to get rid of the 
hydraulic grinding machines that had enabled him to survive during the war but which 
represented the antithesis of his life dream. The idea was to keep the production going only to 
finance the development and construction of his first automobile. This is the very first Ferrari, 
the one that he is going to own, the one that he's going to manufacture and the one that he's 
going to race.

He builds his first car. He starts racing them. So now he's realized his dream. He's going to win. 
And just like I talked last week and when I talked about the podcast of the Wright brothers and 
even on some of the Henry Ford podcasts, winning automobile races for small car manufacturer 
was huge, and that changes Ferrari's fortunes forever. He starts winning over and over again, 
and that gives the foundation to build the Ferrari company. Okay?

So I want to close on this, which I think is the single-most important part of his life. Remember, I 
asked you to keep in your mind when he was, what, 18, 20 years old, he's crying -- he's in Turin. 
He's crying on that bench after being rejected by Fiat, right? Isn't it just some kind of beautiful 
poetry that Fiat's the one that winds up buying his company like 10 years, 15 years, where we're 
at in the story. Okay?

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 16 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lossus, LLC.



So he takes his car to a race. It's the Gran Turismo or something like that. It's in Turin, and they 
win. It's a huge day for him. So after the race, this is what he does. In a moment of triumph, once 
the celebration had ended and there was no more complements to receive, the last interview 
over and his notebooks closed and he was away from prying eyes, there was one last thing that 
Enzo Ferrari wanted to do before leaving. There was a precise spot where he wanted to go not 
far from the finish line of a race that had meant so much to him and that represented a 
milestone in his professional life.

Nearby, there was a bench in Valentino Park. It was like all the others, made out of wood and 
wrought iron. For almost 30 years, that bench had represented a starting point for him, and now 
he knew a goal. On that bench, he had found comfort of the day -- on that day in November of 
1918 when Fiat had denied him a job. Today, on the day of his first prestigious win by a car that 
bore his name, Enzo Ferrari had come to pay a debt he had with himself. He left his men and 
ventured into the park alone as he had been 30 years earlier. He searched for that specific 
bench that for three decades had populated his nightmares. He found it, sat on it, and wept just 
as he had wept out of despair in the fall of 1918.

The tears of that day in October of 1947 had a very different taste. Tears were included because 
only the complete replication of what he had done and suffered 29 years earlier would set him 
free. For Enzo Ferrari, this ceremony marked the end of the first part of his existence.

And I'm going to leave the story there. We now know everything that happened from that day 
until the rest of his days was his complete and utter dedication to manufacturing and racing 
Ferraris, something that occupied every thought he had until the day he died in 90 years old. So 
for the full story, I recommend reading the book, Enzo Ferrari: Power, Politics, and the Making of 
an Automotive Empire. If you want to read the book and support the podcast at the same time, 
I'll leave a link down in the show notes.

Thank you very much for listening. Thank you very much for your support. Please tell a friend 
about the podcast, and I will talk to you next week.

Founders - #98 Enzo Ferrari (the making of an automobile empire)
Page 17 of 17. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.


# Transcript 3

Introduction
"In 1963, following a business deal gone sour, two industrialists from either side of the Atlantic 
Ocean became embroiled in a rivalry that was played out at the greatest automobile race in the 
world. In its broad strokes, this book chronicles a clash of two titans. Henry Ford II of America 
and Enzo Ferrari of Italy at the 24 Hours of Le Mans. The 24 Hours of Le Mans is a sports car 
race. But in the 1950s and 1960s, it was more than that. It was the most magnificent marketing 
tool the sports car industry had ever known. Renowned n manufacturers built street-legal 
machines that would prove on the racetrack that their cars were the best in the world. A win 
translated into millions in sales. It was a contest of technology and engineering of ideas and 
audacity. Success could only be achieved by the marriage of brilliant design and steel-willed 
courage. It would require a greasy-fingered visionary to run the show, a team of the most skilled 
drivers in the world, and the swiftest racing sports car ever to hurtle down a road, all things of 
which the optimistic Americans believed could be purchased with the all-mighty dollar."

Okay, so that's an excerpt from the book that I read this week and the one I'm going to talk to 
you about today, which is Go Like Hell: Ford, Ferrari, and Their Battle for Speed and Glory at Le 
Mans and it was written by A.J. Baime. So I've been wanting to read this book for several 
months, and I decided to wait because there's a high-budget movie that's coming out next 
week starring Matt Damon and Christian Bale, among others, about the story that's in the book. 
The name of that movie is Ford vs. Ferrari. And so what I'm going to do today is I'm going to use 
this book as the start of a two-part series that I want to do on Enzo Ferrari. So the parts that I 
picked out of the book the one that I want to talk to you about today has to do with what can 
we learn from the founder of Ferrari and his unique personality and the way he goes about 
things.

And then next week, I'm going to go into what may be the longest book that I've ever read for 
the podcast. I have the hardcover. It's a biography of Enzo Ferrari. It's like 980-something pages. 
Maybe the -- when I read all of Warren Buffett's shareholder letters, that was probably a little 
longer. But it's going to be -- we're going to go into -- I'm going to go into much more detail 
next week. But this book is a great way to introduce us to who Enzo Ferrari was and to how he 
thought about building his business.

Ford vs. Ferrari
So where I want to start is we're going to see -- so like I said before, I'm going to focus mainly 
on Enzo Ferrari. But if you happen to read this book, you're going to realize that there's an -- it's 
interesting because it's really comparing and contrasting the difference between a founder and 
a manager. So you have Henry Ford II, which is the grandson of Henry Ford, who is now taking 
over a company 60-something years after its founding. And he's going up against Enzo Ferrari, 
who has complete control over his small company. So I just want to read this section that really 
highlights what's going on, "Unlike the men who founded American car companies early in the 
century, Henry Ford, Ransom Olds, the Dodge Brothers. The auto men of the day didn't have to 
know how to design an engine" So they're talking about the people running the companies in 
the 1960s.

"They did have to be good at math." And here's a quote from Ford's Vice President at the time. 
He says, "This is a nickel and dime business all the way through. A dime on 1 million units is 
$100,000. We'd practically cut your throat around here for a quarter. Companies were no longer 
run by the men whose names were on the cars." Okay. So as of today, I've done 3 podcasts on 
Henry Ford. I'll do at least another one in the future. If you haven't gone back and listened to 

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 1 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssus, LLC.



them, it's Founders #9, #26, and #80. This time period is fascinating to me. And I'm eventually 
going to do podcasts on Ransom Olds and then the Dodge Brothers. I talked a little bit about 
the Dodge Brothers on a few of the Henry Ford podcasts because they're crazy, interesting 
people. So I want to compare now the way that Ford, the Ford organization is talking about their 
products, right? So they're saying, it's a Nickel and dime business.

And we're going to compare and contrast that to the passion that Enzo Ferrari has for the 
products that he's making, and it is completely different. And here's an example of that. "For 
Enzo Ferrari, the internal combustion engine was a symbol of life. It had revolutionized society. 
He had watched it all happen during his lifetime. He spoke of automobiles as if they were alive. 
Cars possess unique behaviors. They breathe through their carburetors. They were skinned with 
metal. 'Ferrari's aim,' he once told a reporter addressing himself in the third person, 'is to perfect 
and ideal to transform inert raw material into a living machine, the engine of a car was both 
heart and soul. Its rumble, the heartbeat of the creature."

So when I read that section, one, Enzo Ferrari's passion is infectious. He comes across in the 
book way more -- even though he is kind of Machiavellian in nature, I was way more drawn to 
him and wanting to learn from him than the way Henry Ford II comes across in the book. But 
what I'm realizing by reading all these books is that we know that interest compounds, money 
can compound, time can compound, but knowledge also compounds. And so the more you 
expose yourself to all these ideas that all these entrepreneurs of the past have used in their life. 
You realize that those there's stroke that are the same and yet their applications can be infinitely 
different.

So I saw this excerpt the other day, and I want to read to you. It has to do with how nature 
design things. And it says, "Nature is never modular. Nature is full of almost similar units, waves, 
raindrops, blades of grass, et cetera. But though the units of one kind are all alike in their broad 
structure, no two are ever alike in detail." So the authors list two ideas here. He says, "Number 
one, the same broad features keep recurring over and over again."

So he's talking about nature. I would say that statement is exactly true if you study all these 
biographies. The same broad features keep recurring over and over again. "Number two, in their 
detailed appearance, these broad features are never twice the same." So those two statements 
could seem like they're in conflict, but the application of those ideas, these broad reoccurring 
themes lead us to millions and millions of essentially unlimited different variations of how these 
ideas can be applied in the real world.

So let me give you an example of that with the author saying here, "On one hand, all oak trees 
have the same overall shape, the same thickened, twisted trunk, the same crinkled bark, the 
same shape leaves, the same proportion of limbs to branches to twigs. On the other hand, no 
two trees are quite the same. The exact combination of height and width and curvature never 
repeats itself. We cannot even find two leaves, which are exactly the same." Same thing goes for 
businesses. So why do I bring that up now? Because what immediately jumps to my mind, when 
I'm sitting here listening and reading about Enzo Ferrari, so I finished reading this book, I've 
already started reading his biography and it keeps reoccurring. He has a passion for cars at a 
very -- and for creating a product that is more akin to like a craftsman than like a CEO of a large 
company.

And I think there's like a -- that passion is infectious and it's also like good marketing. When I 
hear a founder speak about their product in a way that Enzo speaks about his cars, even though 
I have no interest in his cars, you're more likely to be attracted to buy that product. And what it 
reminds me of is this quote, I'm going to play into the microphone right now from Steve Jobs 
that happen a few years before he died. And he talks about why having passion for what you're 
doing with the product you're making, the company you're creating, how you're spending your 

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 2 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colos us, LLC.



waking hours is so important. So I'm just going to play that you are really quick. It's about 55 
seconds.

"You have to have a lot of passion for what you're doing. And it's totally true. And the reason is, 
is because it's so hard that if you don't, any rational person would give up. It's really hard, and 
you have to do it over a sustained period of time. So if you don't love it, if you're not having fun 
doing it, you don't really love it, you're going to give up. And that's what happens to most 
people actually. If you really look at the ones that ended up being "successful" in the eyes of 
society and the ones that didn't. Oftentimes, it's the ones that are successful love what they did 
so they could persevere when it got really tough. And the ones that didn't love it, quit because 
they're sane, right? Who would want to put up with this stuff if you don't love it? So it's a lot of 
hard work, and it's a lot of worrying constantly. And if you don't love it, you're going to fail. So 
you got a love it and you got a passion."

So the reason how this relates is that when he's building his company, he's going to have to go 
-- Enzo that is, he just has to go through problem after problem after problem. It's not like a 
straight lineup. And I think what caused him to never quit is the fact that he -- there was no 
separation in his life between what he was doing at Ferrari and living. And so I'll get into that 
now. So let me go back and jump into the book. So I need to talk -- I think the passion of Enzo 
has something to do with the city that he lived in and the one that he would rarely want to leave. 
And let me just give you a description of the city in Italy. It's called Modena. I might be 
pronouncing that incorrectly.

But it says, now speaking about the city. "Its true fame, however, was its craftsman, absurdly 
gifted artisans abound so that you can have almost anything made, made surprisingly well and 
so cheaply that you must never get used to that miracle. As in all Italian cities and towns, the 
Modenese held beauty in great esteem. In this city, an old world aesthetic was joined by 
modernity's defining ambition to harness power."

"It is my opinion, Ferrari once wrote, that there are innate gifts that are particular to a certain 
region and that transferred into industry, these propensities may at times acquire an exceptional 
importance. In Modena, where I was born and set up my own works," now listen to the sentence 
is going to say here, right? "In Modena, where I was born and set up my own works, there is a 
species of psychosis for racing cars. Ferrari was a metal workers son. His name came from the 
Italian word ferro, meaning iron. He would describe himself as neither a designer nor an 
engineer, but rather an agitator of men."

Okay, so let's stop right here and think about what has already happened, right? We have Ford 
Vice President, we have -- it's being run by the grandson, saying nickel and dime, we're going to 
cut costs, we're going to keep it as low as possible and we're going to produce. I mean, that's 
essentially -- Henry Ford wanted to -- his quote is that I'm building a motor car for the 
multitudes, right? So he's going to create like the most basic car possible to spread it out to 
most people. Ferrari is doing essentially the same thing, Ford is making cars, Ferrari is making 
cars. They take two vastly different approaches, though. And even the way -- you could see it 
not only -- obviously, their philosophy is going to be played out in the products you make, right, 
but also the way they talk about those products.

He's talking about basically having a love affair with this living creature that is the car versus oh, 
we're just going to cut costs and make the cheapest piece of crap that we can possibly 
produce. And what it reminding me of is when I was -- I took notes on this when Steve Jobs is 
29 years old, he gave this long interview because they're releasing the Macintosh. Let me read 
another quote from him. He says, "We didn't build the Mac for anybody else. We built it for 
ourselves. We were the group of people who are going to judge whether it was great or not. We 
weren't going to go out and do market research." These car companies -- in the 1960s, American 

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 3 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col s
s, LLC.



car companies are famous for doing that.

"We just wanted to build the best thing we could build. When you're a carpenter making a 
beautiful chest of drawers, you're not going to use a piece of plywood on the back, even though 
it faces with the wall and nobody would ever see it. You will know it's there. So you're going to 
use a beautiful piece of wood in the back. For you to sleep well at night, the aesthetic, the 
quality has to be carried all the way through."

So why am I going on and on about this? Because when you hear two people talking, think 
about it from a customer's perspective, what you're more likely to want to give your money to? 
The person that gives a shit about what they're doing, that's clearly all in, that's extremely 
passionate about it, or the person is saying, hey, we're just trying to make another black Model T 
and hopefully, we can do it at $0.10 cheaper next year than we did this year. It's just not 
comparable.

All right. So let's go back into -- okay, so now we're going to start to see Ferrari's schedule. He's 
58 years old at this time. And I'm going to tell you a little bit about his early life, but I'm going to 
more talk more about that next week. All right. Ferrari, he works 7 days a week, 12 to 16 hours a 
day holidays included. At night, he returned to Modena, that's a city lives in. He travels a few 
short miles away to where the Ferrari factory is. He felt extremely emotionally attached to his 
city, except for his daily drives to Maranello, he refused to leave Modena for almost any reason. 
He just had one focus in life.

Now the difference between let's compare and contrast Ferrari's business model with Ford. 
Ford makes thousands of cars every few days. What does Ferrari do. Ferrari produces just a few 
cars each week. So who's going to pay for the ability to do that. Paying for it all was a rarefied 
group of clients who commissioned their cars as if there were pieces of art and paid Enzo Ferrari 
extraordinary amounts for them. So not only is Ferrari producing a very extreme product, but he 
also had -- he's a very extreme person. And I'll talk more about that, but here's an example, he 
was just really hard to figure out.

It says, "Ferrari was a riddle, a man who built racing cars but refuse to attend races." He used to 
be a racecar driver, actually, that's how get started. But I'll talk about -- I don't think I'd talk 
about that more in this book, but I definitely will next week. So he was a man who built raising 
cars who refused to attend races. "He worked tiredly seed to perfect state-of-the-art machines, 
but he feared elevators." He also refused to ever fly in a plane, too. Let me talk to you about his 
early life here. It says, "Ferrari could remember the day he was seduced by automobiles. He was 
11 years old. The year was 1909.

One day, he rose from bed and set out across the rail tracks adjacent to his home. He hiked the 
2 miles alone. In the countryside, the Modena Automobile Association had organized a race. It 
was a group of drivers we were going to attempt to break the mile speed record. "Donkeys far 
outnumbered automobiles on Modena's streets in 1909. Motor cars were objects of curiosity 
and a chance to see how fast it could go lured a bustling crowd. Enzo took in the scene." So at a 
very young age, he falls in love with cars. A few years later, he's like, I know what I want to do. I 
want to be a racecar driver. "Unfortunately, World War I derailed Ferrari's ambitions, the war 
ravage Italy destroying its economy and infrastructure." Yet here's the positive or the negative.

"And yet the war accelerated the innovation of automobiles and airplanes. The war left Ferrari 
penniless. His father and brother dead. He was relatively uneducated, having sat through 4 years 
of elementary school and 3 years of trade school," which he failed out of, by the way. "But he 
possess a valuable talent, a knack for fixing things. At age 23, he joined Alfa Romeo as a test 
driver, mechanic, and competitor. In 1929, Ferrari founded," these are Italian words, I'm going to 
mispronounce, "Scuderia Ferrari, a private team that served as Alfa Romeo's racing arm." 
Remember, at the beginning of the book, it talks about that these races were the greatest 

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 4 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssus, LLC.



marketing tool that the industry ever saw. This is also not new.

We saw this back in the early 1900s. Henry Ford got a lot of publicity by -- even though he 
didn't like racing, he entered Ford cars into racing. I think he even race and won himself because 
he understood the value of that attention. We also saw back in Founders #28 when I covered 
the Wright Brothers. People from all of the world, there'll be tens of thousands of people joining. 
They actually had a demonstration of Le Mans, too. I think it was Wilbur Wright. It might have 
been Orville. But all these people come, and they see these flying machines and of course, a 
certain percentage of those people at these races and these events are going to want to buy 
what's being demonstrated.

Let's see, it said, so he founds a racing team. He won his last race in 1931. He's actually pretty 
good at it. Ferrari declared that he would never race again. He had a son and he devoted himself 
to creating a legacy that would live beyond him. So now I want to tell you about Ferrari's three 
principles for winning. What I would say about him is that I think he was a master at 
understanding human nature more than almost anything else. And so we're going to see that 
here. So he talks about all the stuff he learned, racing, and then now starting to build cars.

He says, "During these years, the agitator of men, as he was nicknamed, studied the psychology 
of winning. Certain principles were self-evident, and this is the three he came with up with. 
Number one, competition is the impetus for innovation. The fiercer the competition, the faster 
the cars will go." This also played on how -- he has a rather, I would say, controversial 
management style. And one, I don't know if I'd emulate, but I'm going to tell you about it.

He believed that competition brought the best out in people. And so what he would do is he 
would have multiple people in the company assigned to the same role and he put people in the 
company even though they're working for the same goal against each other because he wanted 
to make them compete because he thought the results of that competition would be better. He 
would also have like -- engage in like almost psychological warfare. So I don't think it would be 
very easy to work for him. "Number two, there is in some men a need to achieve greatness." This 
also applies to people too generally.

But he says, "When match with talent, this necessity can turn humans into demigods. And 
number three, a man who is willing to die at the wheel is always likely to beat a man in a faster 
car if he can survive until the end of the race." So there's also something I need to tell you about 
that I didn't know before I read the book in the '50s, '60s this specific part of racing, which is 
called Formula 1. Everybody dies essentially. He's got like -- Ferrari recruit, let's say, nine drivers. 
Two will wind up quitting for other reasons. The other seven within a few years will all be dead.

Every time in the book, he introduce a new character like, oh, why am I -- who's this new 
character? Two paragraphs later, they're dead. I went and looked up because I was like, how is 
this even possible? A few people every year during the time period we're at in the book, a few 
drivers. They call them pilots, though. So a few pilots would die. Eventually, by the time you get 
to the '80s, they drastically made the safe sport or to now the sport is safer, sorry.

I looked it up -- when you have Senna, which is one of the most famous last Formula 1 drivers to 
die. He died in '94. Since then, since 1994. I think there were about five drivers that died. There'd 
be five drivers that died a year in the '50s and '60s. No one would they die, but their cars would 
be -- they lose control of them and they go into the stands. And one time, they killed like 70. I 
want to say 70 people watching the race.

Racing Is Marketing
This is a really insane time period, an insane story, but it attracts very extreme personalities to 

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 5 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l

sus, LLC.



the point where Ferrari was saying, if you want to win, you have to be willing to die at the wheel. 
I don't want to die, not in that way. But this entire book is introducing us -- some of my notes I 
left is like everybody in this book is hardcore. They're very, very extreme. Okay. So now I want to 
talk to you a little bit about how Ferrari, the company started, racing is marketing, and then 
we're going to get into more of his personality and the philosophy he has to running businesses.

So one of the drivers, the former racecar drivers that survived for Ferrari is this guy named 
Chinetti, and he gives this idea to Ferrari about building cars for the masses, not for the masses, 
but not just for racing. So it says, "Chinetti was an American citizen now, and he described what 
he found in the new world." So he used to be living in Italy, lives in America now. He's coming 
back to Italy to tell Enzo all this stuff.

"Roads were filled with big Detroit cars, but the sports car did not exist. There was no such 
thing. Chinetti had an idea, Ferrari should build cars and sell them in America. It took Ferrari 
nearly two years to build the first car. In post-war Europe, electricity was a luxury. Fuel and 
manpower were in short supply." So that's part of why I wanted to play that quote, that audio 
from Steve Jobs talking about if you're not passionate -- if Enzo did not -- he ran into so many 
barriers and obstructions and problems that if he wasn't completely committed and completely 
passionate, he would have given up.

And as a result, we wouldn't have the creations that he made. "Fuel and manpower were in short 
supply. All we wanted to do was build a conventional engine, he later recalled." So he's saying, 
but here's the caveat he puts in there. So he want to build a conventional engine, only one that 
would be outstanding. So it's a completely high set of standards he has for himself and the 
products he's making.

He says, "The first post-war Le Mans was won by Chinetti in a Ferrari." Now what happens, 
right? "The win triggered an instant demand for Ferrari's cars across the continent." Now he also 
-- this book doesn't talk about it, but his biography does that people that knew him well 
considered him a master at marketing. The author states that he invented a lot of marketing that 
was now used in the past. I don't know if that's true, I've read like two books on David Ogilvy by 
now.

I think a lot of the principles that Ferrari figured out, Ogilvy also figured out at a similar time. But 
he was definitely very gifted at it. So what he would do, let me give you an example of that is 
like even when there was -- many times, his company is suffering poor financial results, and so 
they'd have like an abundance of inventory, right? But they would hide the inventory because 
people would travel all over the world to the factory to meet Enzo to see the car, it was like an 
experience, right?

It's not just going to a car dealership, which is kind of like a headache now. And people are like, 
Enzo, I love -- people travel from America, for example, I want to buy a car, I want to buy a car. 
And he's like, yes, okay, but you're going to have to wait several months. And he did that 
because he wanted Ferraris to be desired. And if somebody traveled and says, okay, here's pick 
out one of the six I haven't sold yet. They're not desiring. He wanted to -- and he knew by 
human nature, the more you wait for something, the harder it is to get. The more you pay for it, 
the more value you're going to get out of it. It's very interesting.

So it says, "Ferrari funneled every lira or dollar into the racing campaign. Money was tight and 
the business model demanded that races be won. Why would a wealthy sportsman buy Ferrari if 
a Jaguar had proved the finer machine on the track? Nothing like a Ferrari had ever graced 
American roads. They were cars built by Italian artisans. Every detail down to the steering wheel 
handcrafted using some of the same method used to make Roman suits of armor and the royal 
carriages of the ancient kingdoms. Years later, Ferrari was asked, which of his cars was his 
favorite? He answered, 'The car, which I have not yet created.' And which of his victories meant 

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 6 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssus, LLC.



the most, 'The ones which I have not yet achieved."

So again, he's taken a completely different approach. At this time, Ford's factories -- he's got 
giant factories all over the world, highly automated. They'll churn out more Fords in 48 hours 
than Ferrari make all year. Enzo is not taking that. He's not interested in that. They're hand built.

They're made by artisans. They take an extreme amount of time, and they sell at 20x or 30x the 
price of like a base level Ford. And I think one of the important things to realize about that is if 
you're taking that route, you're making a handmade product essentially, you're not going to 
describe that product in boring terms because you're intimately associated with every detail of 
it. And so here's an example of Ferrari's level of dedication, and that's the main point of this 
podcast is like, even if you're not extremely passionate about the product you're making, maybe 
you're passionate about the problem you're solving or the company you're building. But it's the 
way to describe it to the outside world that I think is really essential.

There's a lot of parts of Ferrari's personality I don't find attractive. But one thing I'm extremely 
attracted to is the way he would describe and talk about why he's doing what he's doing. So 
check this out, "When asked about the root of his mania." Think about the word too, mania, 
that's crazy. "When asked about the root of his mania, his obsession with victory, Ferrari told 
one reporter, 'Everything that I've done, I did because I couldn't do anything less. One day, I 
want to build a car that's faster than all of them, and then I want to die." And there's so many 
great quotes about him talking like this in the book. I frigging love it.

Here's another one, "This kind of love, which I can describe in almost a sensual or sexual way 
within my subconscious, is probably the main reason why for so many years, I no longer went to 
see my cars race. To think about them, to see them born and to see them die because in a race, 
they are always dying even if they win, it is unbearable." Okay. So we're now at a part in the story 
where he's winning races, but he spends all of the money. So basically, he was attracted to 
racing first, then he realized, oh, I'm going to build cars as a way to fund my race team, right? 
And he becomes extremely passionate about the cars he's building because he's also racing 
them at the same time.

Now this is important because it's going to set up the entire like why this book is written. I 
haven't even got to like where is the Ford versus Ferrari in all this. But to understand why Ford, 
Henry Ford II has this vendetta of Enzo we have to understand what's happening with Enzo's 
company first. So it says, "Ferrari's company was struggling. He spent all of his profits on racing, 
and he was badly in need of money. He was being vilified at every turn." So what's happening is 
what I was telling you, all his drivers were dying. And it's not just Ferrari's, like all -- they all die. 
This is an insane time in human history that they're engaging this.

It says, in the newspapers, he used to be called the magician of Maranello. That's the city that 
his cars are made in and now he's being called the monster of Maranello. One contact driver's 
wife called him an assassin. So he had another nickname picked up for his whole life is an 
assassin because so many of his drivers die. And his thoughts, he's like, had he not brought Italy 
another world championship? Had he not raised the reputation of Italian automobile into the 
stratosphere? So I mean, this is a kind of a hardcore person. He's like, well, these deaths are 
unfortunate, but they're necessary. And let's not focus on the individual death, let's focus on 
what it says -- he's extremely nationalistic, right?

And a lot of these race war. At the time, they're like, no, the Italians won. Oh, the Germans won. 
It's very -- almost like a miniature -- like a war is playing out in the race field, right, or the 
racetrack. So he said, "The old man was livid and so he came up with a plan." And this is what I 
mean by he's very Machiavellian, he's like a great strategist. He's just -- and to serve his goal, I 
don't know if you want to be like this with individual -- like personal relationships. Probably not a 
good way to -- he almost essentially use people to get what he wanted. So again, I don't think 

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 7 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssus, LLC.



that's something you want to do with people. You could probably be as successful by not doing 
that, but that's definitely something that we see over and over again. There are people that 
they're so focused on their goal that they're willing to do things that other people may not 
appreciate.

And Ferrari is definitely like -- we can't hide the negative parts of who he was. It's very apparent 
when you study him. So anyways, he comes up with this idea, right? And he's like, I'm going to 
sell my -- so he's getting -- I need to explain this to you a little bit better. He's getting vilified by 
his own people, right? But he's also saying, hey, I'm doing this for the pride of Italy. He loves his 
country. He loves his city. He loves his region. He says, okay, you want to vilify me? I'm going to 
sell the best Italian car company to the Americans.

So I'm going to go here, and I'm going to negotiate with Ford. And let me give you the 
difference between Ford and Ferrari at the time. Henry Ford II at the same time he's doing 
negotiations with Ferrari. Ferrari he's like, I'll let you buy my company for $18 million, right? At 
the same time, the Ford organization is investing $800 million to open a new factory in Europe. 
So that gives you the difference of scale between the two businesses. Ford has tens of 
thousands and they have like 300,000 employees, something crazy like that. Ferrari has like 
200. So this is how and why the Ford and Ferrari negotiations began.

"If the market abroad was the future and racing victories translated into sales, the Ferrari factory 
could be a brilliant strategic acquisition. Iacocca got to go ahead to explore." So you might know 
this name, Lee Iacocca. It's funny how life works. But I read his biography like 18 years ago 
because at the time I was reading -- instead of reading books on founders, I was reading books 
on CEOs and stuff. So I read his book, Jamie Dimon's book, et cetera, et cetera. Well, at this 
point in history, Lee Iacocca he's a high paid executive in Ford. He hasn't yet had a falling out 
with Henry Ford II, which you will, which causes him to leave and go to Chrysler. And then he 
does maybe one of the greatest company turnarounds ever. So if you're interested in that, you 
can study his history. But he's the one saying, hey, we're going to try to go and buy Ferrari.

And so now he sends over this other executive. His name is not important, but he's going to 
meet with Enzo Ferrari. He says, "Yes, Ferrari said, he was interested in striking a deal. He chose 
Ford because he was a great admirer of Henry I." That's actually true, but he does not like Henry 
II. He doesn't like Americans in general. "He would sell his factory to the Americans as long as he 
could retain control of the racing team. He had no interest in the customer cars," running that 
division that means. "I never felt myself to be an industrialist, but a constructor, Ferrari told the 
Ford man. The production development of my firm is only of interest to me if it is conducted by 
others. But be quite clear that in the construction and management in the racing cars, I want 
absolute autonomy."

So he's setting up this deal, but he has a bunch of requests, right? And in hindsight, I think he's 
setting up the request, this is a ruse, I need to tell you that right up front. He's never going to 
sell it to Ford. He's just wasting their time. The asking price was $18 million. I already told you 
that. It says, "As negotiations moved about, the executive reported back to Henry Ford II. Never 
did it occur to the Ford man that the whole deal could be, in fact, an elaborate machination, a 
ruse that Enzo Ferrari may have had another agenda completely. By this time, news of the deal 
was public knowledge, making it headlines all over the world. It would be the most unusual 
merger in automotive history. The Italian press was up in arms. It was as if they were losing a 
national treasure, the Ferrari Automobile, to these arrogant westerners, this pleased Ferrari. It 
seemed that he was not the monster of Maranello after all, but a monument to Italy."

See, what he was trying to do here? No Italian would ever underestimate his value again. So he's 
reading the document -- Ford prepared this document, here's our official offer. He says, "As 
Ferrari read the document, the Ford men saw him underlining certain passages in red ink. In the 

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 8 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colo
sus, LLC.



margin, he drew a large exclamation point. It was clear he was angry. But here, Ferrari said 
holding the document, it is written that if I want to spend more money for racing, I have to 
request authorization to do so from America. Is it also written that away in the official English 
text?" because he's reading in Italian. "Where is the freedom that I demanded right from the 
start to make programs, select men and decide on money? But they're like, but Mr. Ferrari, you're 
selling your firm to us, and you pretend still to dispose of it at your pleasure.

Ferrari's face contorted, something uncoiled inside of him. 'My rights, my integrity, my very 
being as a manufacturer, as an entrepreneur cannot work under this enormous machine, this 
suffocating bureaucracy of the Ford Motor company,' he shouted." Okay. So why am I telling 
you this? Why is this important? One, to give you an insight into Ferrari's personality. He did this 
whole thing because it hurt him that he was being vilified by his own people, and he's actually 
really smart.

Like, oh, now Ferrari is going to be American? No, no, it's ours. It's our national treasure. And the 
second thing is when Henry Ford II hears about this, he dedicates essentially unlimited 
resources to beating Ferrari because Ferrari is having a lot of financial success because they 
were winning a bunch of races, specifically, they're winning Le Mans I think like four or five years 
in a row, I forgot how many years in a row, but a lot. And so now Henry Ford is going to say, 
okay, well, he's going to spend $18 million to Ferrari's company.

Now he spends like $40 million in a year, just developing race cars. So that's why at the 
beginning the book. They're like, well, the Americans thought they could win with the almighty 
dollar. It turns out they were correct. Now something that covers in the book that I'm not going 
to talk at all about because I want to focus on Enzo Ferrari the person, is Ford approaches the 
way a big company does, and they don't have any success for like two years. And then they 
have to hire this entrepreneur Carroll Shelby, who build, you may have heard, Shelby cars. 
Actually, he's so fascinating in this book, and he's such like a misfit and a troublemaker and like a 
smartass that I'm immediately attracted to learn more about him.

So I ordered a book. He's eventually going to be at future founders episode, but I'm not going to 
cover him at all. He's actually -- Matt Damon is going to play Carroll Shelby in that new movie. 
And I'm going to go watch the movie next week before I record the second part of the series to 
see if maybe there's anything in there that I can bring back to you guys that's useful. So I'm just 
going to give you a basic plot of the book. We obviously know how it turns out. Ford is not 
successful. Eventually, he gets the right people in place. Shelby being integral to -- one of the 
people very important to that success. And eventually, they're going to dethrone Ferrari and 
Ferrari is going sell his company and FIAT. So that's the basic premise of the book. But I still 
want to focus on what we learned from Enzo from the book.

Building A Product
So this is Enzo describing the process of building a product. And this goes back to what I feel is 
his main attribute and one that I want to emulate is the fact that anything you're working on, 
bring passion to it. Passion is universal. It doesn't matter what culture you're from, what country 
you're from, it's universally attractive to other humans. And I think you're going to be better off 
-- all of us will be better off if we're working about something we're extremely passionate about 
because you can't hide passion.

And it's understandable even if you don't -- you know what's so funny about passion, you can 
hear from the way the annotation of a voice or gestures or body language, you can see it even if 
you don't know what they're saying. All right. So it says, he once described the process of 
building such a car. Now this is Ferrari, "In the first act of his labor, the maker can sees what his 

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 9 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Coloss
s, LLC.



creature is to be." Think about that. He calls himself a maker and he talks about what he's making 
a creature, a living thing.

Goes back to that, "He dreams of it, and he sees it in detail, and he lays down the plan of work 
which he entrusted to a band of helpers who share his passion. A racing car, in fact, does not 
necessarily come into being as the creation of a superior mind, but is always the compendium of 
the common unflagging and enthralling work of a team fired by a common enthusiasm, there 
follows its construction, which must nearly always be done in record time, although it never 
takes less than six to eight months of feverish work.

"The next stage is the assembly of the car and its testing, which is the most delicate, the most 
engrossing and the most dramatic phase." So halfway through that paragraph, you forget that 
he's talking about a car. He has to bring it back around in the last sentence or two that he's 
actually talking about a car. And what's also interesting to me, the more I learn about him is that 
he only opens up about his creation, about the product that he's making, the company he is 
making.

So here's more about his personality. "A confidant once described the old man's temperament 
as closed like a walnut. Ferrari had created a Shakespearean world where intrigue was always 
brewing and men sometimes paid for mistakes with their lives." It talks about he would hide, he 
would always wear glasses. He essentially would not let people inside. He wanted to collect 
information, not give information, right?

So this is -- he wrote his memoirs, so this is a quote from his memoirs. He says, "The facial 
expression, a smile or a frown or whatever it might be, is merely a form of defense and should be 
taken only as such." You're a very sneaky little dude, man. Now there is one thing in the book 
that has nothing to do -- well, it has something to do with Ferrari, but it's not Ferrari specifically. 
So if you're going back to the movie, Christian Bale in the movie is going to play this guy named 
Les miles, (sic) What Ken Miles is telling us, right? He's telling us that he can finally do -- well, let 
me read it you first, okay? So he says, "We have several advantages over other people who have 
played with the car," meaning the car they're trying to be Ferrari with, Miles told a reporter. "We 
can react to a suggestion. We can do something right now. We don't have to go through 
elaborate procedures of putting through formal design changes. If we decide we don't like 
something, we can take a hacksaw and cut it off. Practically everything we do is a panic 
operation, but if anyone can do it, we can."

So what essentially Ken Miles, we're going to call them Christian Bale is telling us is that they, 
the people competing with Ferrari, can finally do what Ferrari could do the whole time. Ferrari 
didn't -- he was a dictator of his company. He didn't have to ask for permission. He made a 
decision and it happened right away as opposed to the Ford racing team is just like, oh, we got 
to get it clear to three levels of management. There's got to be a meeting. They described some 
of the meetings these people have. It's hilarious to me. It's like, no, we can't make a decision, 
we've got to get 25 people.

Okay, we'll meet two Thursdays from now at this hotel and there will be 25 people meeting for 
six hours and then we'll make a decision. I was like, that's absurd. And the reason I bring this up is 
because, one, it's obviously an advantage that we see over and over and over again in these 
biographies. Founder-led companies just don't have to deal with this. It's very clear who the final 
decision rest with. It also reminds me of a scene that happened several times in that book. I did 
a podcast on the book called the Creative Selection. And it was one of the designers -- one of 
the programmers working at Apple, when they were designing the -- he worked on the keyboard 
for the original iPhone and then also the iPad. And he would describe how decisions were made 
in Apple when Steve Jobs was alive, and it's completely opposite of what one might expect.

Your responsibility was to demo. Steve would want to see what you're working, he's want to 
Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)

Page 10 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



touch it and see it working. And then in a few minutes, he's make a decision, so like making a 
decision on the keyboard of the most important product ever made. It happened in like a matter 
--, I think maybe it was like two or three demos. I can't remember exactly how much. But you're 
talking about a few handful of minutes, five minutes, 10 minutes, maybe 15 minutes, and that's it 
because Steve knew exactly what he wanted.

And when he saw it in real life, he like's, okay, that's what we're going. And that's it. There was 
no, oh, let me go talk to Board of Directors, let me go to talk to this person. It's done. And so this 
change that Ford made is a reason why they were eventually -- they wind up beating Ferrari. 
Once they beat them once, they beat them several years in a row and then Honda and other 
countries started coming in and winning. But I think that's extremely important. All right. So 
more about Ferrari.

This is Ferrari who was asked on if he has a social life. "No, none. Life passes soon enough. If you 
want to do one thing well, you have to work at it fast. A Ferrari may not be a masterpiece in 
exactly the same way that a great work of painting or sculpture is, but it represents the work of 
many men bringing to life the ideas of Ferrari." Again, one, we see two things there. One, he has 
complete dedication to this. He doesn't really think about anything else. And two, he, again, 
describing his products, he's like, oh, it may not be a masterpiece of like a painting or sculpture, 
but he's putting that into your mind as he talks.

Okay. Now I think of a painting, or a great sculpture and now I think of Ferrari too. The way he 
describes his products is amazing. So I want to tell you about this random quote because it's 
been on my mind lately too. There's a quote -- a rider is interviewing a famous bullfighter, right? 
Bullfighter is very similar to racecar pilots at the time. You'd be seriously injured if you're not -- 
you have a dangerous occupation. And so he's interviewing this bullfighter he says something to 
him.

The writer says, "You're the most completely egotistical bastard I've ever met." His response is 
what I want to tell you that I find interesting. He says, "You don't understand. When I go in there, 
if I don't really and truly believe I'm the best in the world, I'd better not go in at all." So on a lot of 
the notes that I've been taking I've been trying to find the parallels for entrepreneurs that you 
see in other domains, whether it's scientists, but especially like athletes, magicians, other artists, 
craftsman like this.

This is something that is hard to talk about, but I think the people that feel they are the best in 
the world are what they're doing, let's use the example I've used many times in this podcast so 
far. I'm pretty sure Steve Jobs thought he was the best in the world at making devices, making 
computers. I'm positive that he thought he was the best in the world at it. I think there's 
something -- like it's not sure -- if you talk to athletes about this, they're going to tell you that 
you don't become the best in the world and then think you're the best in the world. That's not 
the order it happens.

The order it happens is I think I can be the best in the world at it and I'm going to work really 
hard at it and then I'm going to. It's the reverse order that most people think. Most people think, 
oh, you had the success, now you can strut a little bit or maybe talk about like -- the fact that 
you worked really hard now you're the best in the world. They're saying, no, no, no. You need to 
have that belief going in. And I think Steve Jobs had that belief. I think Enzo Ferrari definitely 
believed he was building the best cars in the world.

And my point here is even if there's no reason for you to believe that yet is probably beneficial 
for your belief in your potential to get there, whatever it is. And now in business, it's a lot 
different than a sport -- than like a car race or a basketball game, for example, because those are 
zero-sum events, there's one champion every year and 50 or 100 losers or however many 
people racing. In basketball, 29 other losers whatever the case is.

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 11 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



This is reason I think entrepreneurs take this because there's no -- it's all positive for some. I 
mean there are obviously some industries where there's one or two winners, whatever the case 
is, winner take all. But the vast majority, we can carve out these little, tiny niches, where we can 
be the best. And you can have that belief and then you could find a customer base that also 
believes that.

And if you have that belief and then you have customers that also agree with your belief, then 
you have a successful business, whatever the size that may be. So I don't know the best way to 
describe this. I just think that this is something I see over and over again, and there's something 
there in our psyche that I think is beneficial if you can harness that. And I've talked about this 
before where I feel like why are we at a -- in the United States, we're at a 40-year low to new 
business creation. Entrepreneurship is at a 40-year low.

One thing before you can have a successful company, you have to believe that you can have a 
successful company. I think most people think it's way too difficult. And something that, if you 
listen to this podcast enough, read between the lines is anybody can learn this. It's not like you 
have to go to school and get a certificate or a license to be an entrepreneur. You got people like 
Enzo Ferrari. He failed out of everything. He's got like essentially an elementary school 
education and created one of the most valuable companies and valuable products ever.

You don't have to be good at life. You just need to be good at one specific thing and do it really, 
really well. Go a couple of weeks ago and I was thinking about Jim Clayton the other day. Jim 
Clayton had an amazing life, sold his business for almost $2 billion to Warren Buffet. What did he 
get really good at? He got really good at building a mobile home company. And guess what, if 
you get really good at anything like that, then you can have -- you'll build wealth beyond that 
you could spend on a lifetime, and you'll have a really interesting life.

But there's no school you could go to, like, hey, teach me how to build the most valuable mobile 
home manufacturer in the world, but life can teach you that. And I don't know, I think that's why 
I think entrepreneurship was one of the most interesting things in the world in general because 
I'm always constantly surprised all these unique ways people find products they make and ways 
to support their family and in the fact that it's wide open and available to everybody.

Not everybody can be a doctor. You got to go through a certain track to do so. Not everybody 
can be a million different occupations. But literally, anybody could be an entrepreneur. So I don't 
know, I think tied to the fact that anybody can do it is people have to believe they have the 
ability to do it. And I don't know how to solve that problem other than showing you example 
after example after example of people that come from almost nothing. Think about Jim Clayton, 
he didn't have a bathroom, didn't have electricity. They could take a bath -- there's 4 people in 
his family, they can take a bath once a week using the same water. That person, that guy had no 
advantages in life.

And yet he was ultimately resourceful and built it up over time to build -- he built multiple 
valuable business actually. He built a really profitable car dealership. He build Clayton Homes, he 
wind up building a global banking empire. So I don't know, man, I'm sure there's somebody 
listening to this that doesn't think they could do it, you can. If you really think about it and you 
won't give up and you find something you're passionate about, you absolutely can. Okay. We're 
almost to the end of what I want to talk about in the book. You know the general plot of the 
book. And obviously, the book is -- it's a really interesting and fun read. But I want to pull out 
just a few more things here to share with you.

So one thing is I realize is Ferrari's out here playing chess and everybody he's going against is 
playing checkers. And we're going to get to the point on right before -- he's been beating -- 
Ford has declared war on him for a few years, but is unsuccessful. But Ford is progressing every 
year and Ferrari knows he's about to lose. And so what Ferrari does here is what I mean by he's 

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 12 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssus, LLC.



out here playing chess and everybody is playing checkers.

So he said, "Both he, Enzo, and Henry II lived and breathed their companies. Ferrari has no other 
satisfaction. His family, his very life is that creature of his La Ferrari." That's one of his -- the 
people this guy named Jano, who was one of his best engineers that worked for a long time, 
describing Ferrari. He said, "Ferrari had acute talent for using public opinion to his advantage. He 
was a master of manipulation and subterfuge." Remember, I was referencing this earlier. "And in 
this new era of mass media, he would put his skills to work. He published an article in the Italian 
magazine accepting defeat before the race began, knowing that this bit of gossip would get 
picked up by the international newspapers."

Now this is what Ferrari wrote, "We know that nothing is being done to resist the steamroller of 
the Americans." Remember, he's writing this in an Italian magazine. That's important to 
understand. "To resist the steamroller of the Americans who will find the road open to success in 
sports car racing. We fought on the track with autos and at the table against the abuses of 
power and the regulations. Even while continually winning races, I understood that we are 
gradually losing them. We intensified our activity to the utmost, but we managed simply to slow 
down the approach of the steamroller. The battle was lost in advance."

So what's happening here? It says, "Ferrari, who was willingly casting himself as an underdog, 
Ford was Goliath, and he was David. If he lost, well, he had predicted defeat. Henry II had done 
nothing but buy Le Mans with his countless millions. And if Ferrari won, as he absolutely 
intended to, well, in a lifetime destined by tragedy and victory, perhaps he would achieve his 
greatest moments." So that's the year in 1966 Ferrari does indeed lose, but he doesn't come out 
of it that much worse for wear. Ford winds up winning, their business in Europe grows even at a 
time in America, it's slowly declining at this point. But Ferrari sells 50% of his business to an 
Italian company, which he would never sold it to anybody else, he sells it to FIAT.

And then when he dies, that ownership goes up to 90%. The other 10% goes up to his one 
surviving son, because he had one son who died and he had another son from a mistress, and 
that's son still -- I think still to this day owns 10% of Ferrari. But in the end, Ferrari get what he 
wants, he has the financial stability of a larger company, still able to make decisions in racing 
and has a safe home for his passion and his creation. He still runs the company until he dies. All 
right. So that's the end of the story about Ford and Ferrari. I want to talk about one more thing 
before I wrap up the story.

And this is what I said earlier when I left a note that everybody in this book is hardcore. And it's 
just an amazing quote by this guy named Bruce McLaren. So Bruce McLaren, he plays a role -- 
he winds up being a racecar driver for Ford. He eventually starts his own racing team, and he 
founds McLaren Automotive. And he does all of this before 32 years old when he dies. And he 
dies racing because that was passion in life. I just want to read this quote to you.

It said, "McLaren might have known he would someday die at the wheel. He had just published 
an autobiography in which he had written his own epitaph." So think about the thought process 
there. Who's going to write an autobiography when they're 28 or 30 years old. And now this is a 
quote from McLaren, "To do something well is so worthwhile that to die trying to do it better 
cannot be foolhardy. It would be a waste of life to do nothing with one's ability for I feel that life 
is measured in achievement not in years alone."

So I just want to encourage you to, obviously, not to die from whatever you're doing. That's way 
too extreme. But I like that thought that he says, trying to do better, especially it would be a 
waste of life to do nothing with one's abilities. And I think in the domain of entrepreneurship, 
everybody has some way they can contribute. Some large, some small. But the idea of creating 
something and then over time, making it better, I think that's a worthy way to spend your life.

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 13 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssu
, LLC.



So I'll close the story here. If you want to read the entire book, or if you want -- excuse me, if 
you want the full story, read the book. It is extremely a fun read. I'd probably go see the movie 
too. It's going to be fascinating. But anyways, I leave a link in the show notes on your podcast 
player, if you purchase the book using that link, Amazon sends a small percentage of the sale at 
no additional cost to you. If you want to see every single book that I've done, go to 
amazon.com/shop/founderspodcast and you'll see it's like a visual representation of the podcast 
in reverse chronological order.

So it's kind of cool seeing all the different stories that we've covered so far. And of course, you 
can go to founderspodcast.com, and you'll see the books there, you can sign up and see 
everything I have is at founderspodcast.com. One thing I need to ask of you before I go, if you're 
enjoying the work that I'm doing and you're enjoying the podcast that you're listening to, please 
do me favor this week tell one, at least one friend about Founders Podcast somebody that you 
know that'll be interested in these stories. Text them maybe the link to the website or a specific 
episode. Anything you could do to help spread the word I would greatly appreciate it. Thank you 
very much for listening, and I will talk to you next week.

Founders - #97 Enzo Ferrari (Ferrari vs Ford)
Page 14 of 14. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.


# Transcript 4

Introduction
"It was over. A strangely disappointing anticlimax to a life that had spanned most of the history 
of motorsports. His health had been in severe decline for months, and the end had been 
expected. While his mind remained quick to the last, the powerful body had long since crumbled 
under the sheer weight of years.

Editorial writers around the world groped for words to express what Enzo Ferrari had meant. 
Many tried to describe him as an automotive pioneer, which he was not. Others called him a 
great racing driver and engineer, which he was not. He was exactly what he had repeatedly said 
he was: an agitator of men. And he remained true to his credo to the day he died.

If there was one essential quality about the man, it was his ironbound tenacity, his fierce 
devotion to the single cause of winning automobile races with cars bearing his name. From 1930 
onward, for nearly 60 years, hardly a day passed when this thought was not foremost in his 
mind. Win or lose, he unfailingly answered the bell.

In that sense, his devotion to his own self-described mission was without precedent, at least 
within the world of motorsports. For that alone, he towered over his peers. Enzo Ferrari, the last 
of the great automotive titans, was gone, never to be replaced."

That was an excerpt about the death of Enzo Ferrari. And it comes from the book that we'll talk 
about today, which is, Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine, written by Brock Yates. And I 
wanted to start there because this is the third different -- this is the third podcast that I have 
done on Enzo Ferrari.

The first two, in case you haven't gone back and listened to them, it's Founders #97. It's based 
on that book, Go Like Hell, which is the story about Ford versus Ferrari. And #98 is the 
biography. Actually, #98 is the longest biography I've ever read from the podcast if you don't 
include the book of all Warren Buffett shareholder letters. That biography of Enzo Ferrari is 
almost 1,000 pages long. That's Enzo Ferrari: Power, Politics and the Making of an Automotive 
Empire.

And the reason I wanted to do another book on Enzo and his -- the reason he's one of my 
favorite founders and entrepreneurs that I've come across since doing this podcast is because 
one of the sentences that the author just wrote here, "From 1930 onward, for nearly 60 years, 
hardly a day passed when this thought was not the foremost in his mind." And that's the 
thought of "his fierce devotion to the single cause of winning automobile races with cars 
bearing his name."

Compounding Knowledge Feeding An Obsession
So anytime I have the opportunity to learn from somebody that did the same thing that was 
singularly -- singularly, I can't even pronounce that word. I don't know if I'm talking funny, but I 
just had dental work done, so my jaw is still -- if I do sound funny to you, it's just because my 
jaw is still swollen.

But the reason I think that's so interesting is because it's just very rare for somebody to be 
completely obsessed with the same thing and work on the same thing for nearly six decades. 
And I think what Enzo Ferrari understood is the same thing that Charlie Munger has talked about 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 1 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssus, LLC.



Warren Buffett.

It's this trait that a lot of the people -- a lot of the entrepreneurs that we talk about on this 
podcast know, and it's the fact that knowledge compounds. And if you stay focused on the 
same thing and keep learning about the same thing for multiple decades, never interrupt the 
compounding, you're going to have a unique set of knowledge that no one else does.

And that's why I think also the author says, “He towered over his peers. He was the last of the 
great automotive titans. And when he's dead, he was never to be replaced again.”

So I want to go to the beginning of the book. I want to introduce you to this guy named Luigi 
Chinetti. Actually, you know what, before I do that, I've been getting a lot of messages about 
gift subscriptions especially for this time of the year. I recently just switched to a different 
provider that has a more complete feature set for subscription podcasting.

So there's a link in the show notes that you'll find down below. If you click that link and go to the 
upper right-hand corner, it'll say, gift a subscription, and then it gives you a very simple set of 
instructions on how to do that. If you want to, then you can give a monthly subscription or a 
lifetime subscription. If you're interested in a lifetime subscription, jump on that, though. On 
January 1, the price is going to go way up.

For the last few months, I've been running this experiment. It's been very popular, but it's 
definitely not sustainable. But I do want to give you a few more weeks to take advantage of that. 
So jump on that if that's interesting.

Let me go to Luigi Chinetti. Now the very -- the book opens up. So Ferrari doesn't die until he's 
90 years old, and he works until he dies, okay? And the book opens up with Luigi Chinetti who's 
a few years younger than Ferrari. They were kind of like friends, adversaries, partners in a sense. 
Luigi Chinetti is the one that introduces the Ferrari, like the cars that you can actually sell, a 
private consumer could buy, in America. He's the one that opened up the -- which wound up 
being a gigantic market for Ferrari.

And so the book opens up with Chinetti. He's driving from Modena, which is Ferrari's hometown, 
where he spent most of the time, to Paris. And it plays on the radio that Enzo Ferrari had passed 
away. So there's -- in the introduction, there's a great overview of Chinetti's view of Ferrari that I 
think is helpful to us. Let me go into that.

And he's thinking back multiple decades that they worked together and really had to fight. 
"Ferrari, he's one of the people I most admire because of his obsessiveness, his stubbornness, 
the fact that he identified what was most important to him and he went after with everything he 
had. But he's not necessarily like somebody I'd want to hang out with, let's put it that way. He's 
an extremely difficult and cantankerous person and really just rather crude."

But we get an idea of that because Chinetti just had these battles with him. So he says, "It had 
all been an insane aerobatic display of emotion and ego warfare, and he was tired of it all. They 
had dueled too long. And if a winner had to be declared, it'd have to be Ferrari. But did he not 
always win? Did he not always prevail? Sometimes coming off the mat after repeated bloody 
knockdowns to land a knockout punch."

And that's another admirable characteristic Ferrari had. He had persistence in spades. "Ferrari 
shared the spotlight with no one, not even the man who helped create a market for his 
automobiles larger and more lucrative than anyone could have imagined. He came to know 
Ferrari too well to understand his" -- the reason I'm reading this section to you is because of this 
-- I mean I don't want to mince words here.

He's extremely -- the manipulative personality that Enzo Ferrari had. He was -- he described 
Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine

Page 2 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colos u
, LLC.



himself as an agitator of men. "He was extremely charismatic, and he could convince people to 
do whatever he wanted them to do. And that was one of his greatest strengths in his career." He 
came to know Ferrari too well to understand his chameleon-like public persona, his ability to 
orchestrate the press and the public to artfully play the lovable, beleaguered, poverty-stricken 
patriarch one minute and a ruthless egomaniacal despot the next.

He had seen the public Ferrari, the regal old don who oozed respectability as well as the private 
Ferrari: the belching, farting, cursing, bragging, hectoring, Modenese Pisano, who bore his 
lower-class background like a mark on his forehead.” He, meaning Chinetti, knew Ferrari as the 
consummate manipulator of men.”

He turned on the radio. A newscast was beginning. It was the lead story. In matter-of-fact 
tones, a voice announced that earlier that morning, death had come to Enzo Ferrari.

Ferrari. Dead. It was expected, but somehow it stunned him. This old warrior, this curmudgeon, 
this masterful manipulator, this tireless competitor, this overwhelming presence, this imperfect 
but perpetually fascinating man was finally gone."

Okay. So now I want to go to Enzo's early life, and then I'm going to build up and tell you how he 
became Enzo Ferrari because he definitely didn't start out as anything rather like unique. No one 
would have predicted. If you see Enzo at 20 years old, there's no way you're going to predict 
that he becomes the greatest car manufacturer of all time.

And two quick sentences here that give you an idea of who he was as a kid. "He hated school. 
He simply wanted to be a worker and nothing else." So his dad, they're living in Italy, of course, 
where he spent all his life actually. And his Dad is going to take him to an automobile race, and 
this is where he finds the love of his life, something he's completely obsessed with.

For Enzo, racing automobiles, racing cars was always the #1 fascination, obsession. He was not 
really interested -- he just accidentally started manufacturing some of the greatest cars the 
world's ever seen. But the racing always took precedent over that. His first -- and he sold cars so 
he could fund his racing operation.

His first contact with automobile racing came when his father took him and his brother to a 
race. He was 10 years old. "The following year, young Ferrari trekked" -- so that's the first race. 
This is the second one. "The following year, young Ferrari trekked two miles across open 
farmland to watch his second race. Ferrari said, 'I found these events immensely exciting.'"

And so from a very young age, he had identified exactly what he wanted to do. He's eventually 
going to try to work for car manufacturers and then become a driver -- a racing driver himself.

But this might be -- this is the most important paragraph in the entire description of his early 
life. "Examinations of his youth supply nothing to indicate any extraordinary talents." This really 
speaks to the benefit of not interrupt -- like the fact that knowledge compounds, and don't 
interrupt that, right?

So "Examinations of his youth supply nothing to indicate any extraordinary talents, no glittering, 
undiscovered genius, not even the singular talent for leadership and organization that was to 
blossom later in life. Enzo Ferrari, for his first 20 years, was simply another Italian boy who liked 
bicycles and car races and football."

So when he's 18, something terrible happens. And it says, "In 1916, Enzo Ferrari had his first close 
encounter with death, an acquaintance that would stay with him for the rest of his life." That's a 
very important sentence, too, talking about the dozens -- I mean I don't even know how many 
drivers die at the very beginning of automobile racing. Not only do tons of the drivers die, but 
tons of the spectators die.

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 3 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



So -- and I'll get -- I'll go into more detail. I went into a lot of detail on that on Founders #97, Go 
Like Hell, which just really surprised me at the beginning of the sport how they just -- they had a 
high -- extremely high tolerance for death.

And so he's 18. "Enzo Ferrari had his first encounter with death, an acquaintance that would stay 
with him for the rest of his life. His father died of pneumonia. The little business" -- so this little 
business that his dad had -- "collapsed, and Enzo drifted through a series of menial jobs."

As you probably already realize from the year that we're in, 1916, World War II -- or, excuse me, 
World War I is happening. So he's got to do a bunch of work. "He became a trainee in a small 
factory, manufacturing artillery shells. This was a confusing time for Ferrari. His father was dead, 
and with the convulsions of the war plus his lack of serious career goals, he meandered through 
his late teens without direction.

Then suddenly, shockingly, Dino" -- this is his older brother -- "was dead as well." And so this 
idea that death is an acquaintance that's going to stay with him for the rest of his life. He's 18 
years old. His father's dead. His older brother's dead. So all that's left in the family is him and his 
-- Ferrari and his mom -- Enzo and his mom, rather.

Ferrari is eventually going to have a son. He's going to name his son Dino after his brother. His 
son is going to die. What most people think of, he died from muscular dystrophy in his early 20s.

So death is a constant companion throughout the life of -- throughout the extremely long life of 
Enzo Ferrari. And his brother died because he was in the war. So it says -- and they're not 
entirely sure. There's just a bunch of -- "could have been influenza, typhoid fever or any one of 
the dozen illnesses that ravaged the trenches and camps of the World War I combatants." And 
Dino was serving in that war. Ferrari was devastated by the loss of his Ferrari -- excuse me, of his 
father and brother.

And then right after this, he winds up getting drafted. And so then he's got to serve in the Italian 
Army towards the end of World War I. So I'm going to skip over most of his time in the war. 
There is one thing that he talks about over and over again in his autobiography and other people 
and other documentaries on him that I've seen repeated, is the fact that he winds up getting 
sick. He gets to a -- he's sent to a hospital.

And one of his memories is the fact that he's left in this dark room on the second floor, and all 
you can hear all day and all night is the hammering of lids of coffins being pounded into place.

And the reason I bring that to your attention is because he's very familiar with death at an 
extremely early age. So he's like, "Okay, I don't know how long I'm going to survive, how long I'm 
going to live. I need to get on with my life."

So he comes out of his service. Luckily, the war ends the next year, and he survives. And he's 
just bound and determined to get the job that he wants and to actually live the life that he 
wants. "He was discharged in 1918 as Europe gasped for breath, and men groped to justify the 
sacrifice of 30 million lives. Ferrari seems to have been seized with an epiphany of sorts during 
this period. He wanted to follow a career in automobiles."

And in his autobiography, he describes this period as him and his friend get this -- it's like a 
magazine or some kind of publication. It's amazing how often this -- what I'm about to read to 
you happens in these biographies. So him and his friend are sitting there looking through this 
publication. And it says, "They had examined a photograph of Ralph De Palma, the marvelously 
talented Italian who had moved to America in 1893 and, by 1916, had won both the Indianapolis 
500 and the Vanderbilt Cup. He was believed by many to be the greatest driver in the world."

So Ferrari turns to his friend and he says, "I will become a race car driver." So he has limited 
Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine

Page 4 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colos u
, LLC.



money, no connection. So he goes to -- you can really think about his next move as he's trying 
to get a job at the leading technology company of its day. And it's funny because this is Fiat, 
which is, at the time, that company has been way -- I think it's like 120, 125 years old. So today, 
you don't think of Fiat as a leading technology in the companies today. But in the end of 1920s, 
it was.

So it says, "So he goes to where they're located. He travels." It says, "He had come to Turin with 
a single purpose in mind: to gain employment with Fiat. Fiat was an acknowledged leader in the 
new technology." They're talking about the -- this is the very beginning of the automobile 
industry.

And this time in history, I find extremely interesting. Actually, there's a parallel between the early 
automobile industry in Italy and the early automobile industry in America.

So I did a multiple-part series. It's around Founders #118, and I think it goes all the way to like 
Founders #130. So this is -- I read a ton of biographies on all these -- the early American 
automobile founders and pioneers. So it's people like Henry Ford; Billy Durant, the founder of 
General Motors; the Dodge Brothers; Henry Leland, the guy that founded Cadillac; Albert 
Champion; Alfred Sloan; Walter Chrysler; and Louis Chevrolet.

And there's a number of interesting things, one, they are there at the very birth of what is going 
to become a gigantic industry, global industry, right? And they all knew each other. They're all 
supporting casts in each other's life stories.

And the same thing is going to happen in the early motorsports, this fever for racing that the 
Italians had. Because as we'll see here, like these are -- the names I'm about to read to you -- like 
I'm just telling you now in case I forget this later on in the book. But like the names, like these are 
names that we still know and the car companies are still around 100 years later.

So you hear names like Ferrari, Bugatti, Maserati, Lamborghini. They all knew each other. They 
were all in the relative same area, again, and going after similar goals. And that's just mind-
blowing to me.

So I'll talk more about Bugatti because -- which surprised me, so I don't remember if I learned 
this in the other biography on Enzo, it was the fact that Bugatti was really the blueprint -- and 
Maserati, the Maserati Brothers to some degree, for what Ferrari wanted to do. And it was 
fascinating that other people had laid out a blueprint for him, and then he winds up surpassing 
them.

So anyways, that just -- that thought spun in my mind because in this section of the book, it's 
talking about he's going to Fiat because Fiat's the leading technology company of its day. And 
it's funny how like that's true then, but it's not how we think of things -- that's not how we think 
of the company now.

Okay. So let's go back to this point in his life. So he goes, "Okay, I'm going to travel all the way to 
Turin. I'm going to try to get a job." This is not going to go good for him. One, he doesn't have an 
experience, and two, there's a huge influx of unemployed Italian males coming home from the 
war.

Rejection Fuels Action
And so it says, "It was into this exclusive milieu that the poorly educated, still unhealthy, totally 
unqualified Enzo Ferrari poked his nose. It was useless. The postwar job market was glutted with 
veterans, and Ferrari was doomed from the moment he entered."

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 5 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



I want to bring this to your attention because this is something -- this rejection is something 
that he holds inside of him for 50 years. He called it the lowest day of his life. "Ferrari wrote of 
this moment with poignancy. He wandered through the busy streets to a bench in Valentino 
Park. And then he says, 'I was alone. My father and brother were no more. Overcome by 
loneliness and despair, I wept.'"

And so this is the lowest point of his life. He's depressed. He has no resources. He just got shut 
down. And he's going to reference this because 50 years later, he's going -- remember, this is 
Fiat. Well, I don't know if you know this actually. I don't know if any of you explicitly remember, 
Fiat buys Ferrari. And so 50 years after this point, he goes back. And once he sells the company, 
he sits on that same bench, and he essentially has this like wrong in his mind rectified.

So it says, "The slight by Fiat festered in his brain, creating an anger that blossomed with the 
passage of time." The reason I'm reading this section to you because anger and revenge are 
extremely effective motivators of human behavior. And we see it's definitely a dark side to Enzo 
for sure.

And part of that is the fact that he's got this giant ego, and he wants other people -- it's very 
important how other people view him. And so he wants to prove, "Hey, you made a mistake." 
"Revenge was a priority within him that would not be subdued, and repayment in kind was a 
debt he swore to fulfill no matter how many years it might take."

And then from here, the book just goes through. Something that I try to bring to your attention 
every time is, it's not like he wakes up, "I'm a poor 18-year-old with no father, no brother, on this 
bench, and overnight, I'm the greatest car manufacturer of all time."

Enzo's story is very similar to a lot of these other biographies. You see, what's my next 
opportunity from here? And then once you get to that spot, then you look around, okay, what's 
the next best opportunity? And he just goes from -- he pursues each opportunity one step at a 
time, like just like all of us can, right?

And so it says -- he winds up going and seeking, and he said, "Okay, I want to work in this 
industry. Let me go find out where these people hang out." And so it says, "It was only days after 
Enzo's arrival in Turin that he began to display the greedy resourcefulness and powers of 
persuasion that were to become his trademarks. He began to poke into the thriving community 
of automobile manufacturers, drivers, mechanics, and promoters that had sprung up as satellites 
to the Fiat operation."

And so he just does whatever he can. He's just, "I just need -- I got to get my foot in the door of 
this industry, and then I'll figure out a better way." The very first job he gets, if you think about it, 
he hooks up with his car dealer, this guy named Giovanni. And Giovanni hires him because 
Giovanni is purchasing all the army trucks. Like the Italian army trucks, there's a giant surplus.

And he just figured, "Okay, I'll buy these surplus army trucks from the government. I can get 
them for really cheap. I'll strip them down to the bare chassis." And then he's going to resell the 
bare chassis to a coach maker. That's what they call the cars at this time. I mean if you look at 
them -- I went and looked at like what -- the first like Alfa Romeo when Ferrari works there. And 
they don't look like cars. They're called cars, but they definitely don't look like cars to us today.

And so he said, "Okay, I'm going to take these bare truck chassis, and I'm going to ship them to 
this coach maker in Milan. And then this coach maker is going to put passenger car bodies on 
top of them." Because a ton of -- there's a giant demand for automobiles or these rather 
premium automobiles in postwar Italy, just like there was in postwar America.

So Ferrari is taken as a general handyman. And then he's also hired to transport and to drive and 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 6 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colo
u

, LLC.



get the trucks or the truck chassis up to where they need to go. So it says, "Ferrari carried 
Italian" -- oh, this is interesting. "Ferrari carried Italian driving license number 1363." So they 
actually numbered them. That would imply that he's one of the nation's earliest motorists. So he 
uses this job and then -- to meet other people.

He eventually is going to meet -- this is a mentor of sorts. So he's just going to -- again, this job 
serves a point, just so he can meet new people. Once he meets new people, they tell him about 
other opportunities. If he feels that an opportunity is better, he's going to jump. So he jumps 
from opportunity to opportunity. This guy's name is -- these Italian words are going to kill me. I 
can't even pronounce English words correctly. There's no way I'm going to pronounce these 
Italian names. And they have fantastic names, by the way, or cities.

So I'm just going to call this guy Ugo. I have no idea how to pronounce his last name. Ugo is 
going to be a mentor of sorts to a young Enzo Ferrari. Ugo hires him as a chief test driver for the 
new automaker. This is -- it's CMN. It says, "The company was embarked on a full-scale 
campaign to manufacture high-performance vehicles. And as was the universal custom of the 
day, the factory was entering a variety of races."

Ferrari was hired by Ugo to be his assistant. He had begun his climb up the ladder. And so he 
couldn't get into Fiat, couldn't get in Alfa Romeo yet, so he starts at the very bottom. CMN is a 
tiny firm. It's a new firm. And this is just a little bit about the occupational hazards. I thought this 
paragraph was rather amusing. So it says, "The tiny CMN firm could not afford to transport its 
race cars by rail or truck."

So Ferrari and Ugo were assigned the job of driving to the race. So he's got to transport the cars 
to the race. It was hardly a leisurely tour through the countryside. Ferrari recalled that they 
drove into a nasty blizzard one day, and they were set upon by a pack of wolves, which had to 
be dispensed by shots from the pistol that he always carried under his seat. So imagine if one of 
the occupational hazards of your job is that you might be set upon by a pack of wolves.

So we see I'm skipping ahead, obviously going very fast through the book. "Ferrari soon left 
CMN to seek his fortune in other realms of the Italian automobile business and to further his 
career as a racing driver," which is just another step up.

"Shortly thereafter, he began an association with Alfa Romeo." So again, Alfa Romeo, gigantic 
successful company of its day. I think it winds up being nationalized by the Italian government. I 
think Mussolini nationalized it if I'm not mistaken. "Enzo Ferrari began" -- Mussolini's in his book 
quite a lot. I'm going to skip over most of those parts.

"Ferrari began an association with Alfa Romeo that was to last for nearly two decades." This is 
another important part I want to bring to your attention, is how long Enzo Ferrari had to be 
committed to his desire to be successful. He is like 50 years old, something like that, by the time 
he's able to start the company Ferrari under his own name.

As that sentence just hinted, "He began an association with Alfa Romeo that was to last for 
nearly two decades." So this is where he starts to race cars. He's going to become a car 
salesman as well, and then eventually, he's going to run the racing team for Alfa Romeo. And I 
need to give you a bit about his personality, though, because this is one of the most important 
things to learn about him.

And it says, "There is no question that by this time, Enzo Ferrari had become a compelling 
salesman and manipulator." So this section reminds me of something I learned when -- and you 
see it a lot actually, but what comes to my mind is when I read George Lucas' biography. I'm 
pretty sure this is Founders #35.

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 7 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



So George Lucas is like many of the founders that we cover, he was successful studying history. 
He liked to read biographies. He wanted to know how the great people of history thought, right? 
And it wasn't until he's in his -- like I think he's like 23 years old, and he meets Francis Ford 
Coppola who, I think, is like 28 at the time.

And Francis Ford Coppola becomes like one of his best friends and mentors. And he's the first 
of the independent filmmakers that actually figures a way to break into Hollywood at the time. 
So like what George Lucas was trying to do, Steven Spielberg, Martin Scorsese, another 
example of all these guys knowing each other at the very beginning, which is crazy when you 
think about the careers. Brian De Palma was also in the group that they went on to have.

But he says something in his biography about Coppola. And based on his historic knowledge of 
reading biographies, he said, "Francis could sell ice to Eskimos. He had charisma beyond logic. I 
can see now what kind of men the great Caesars of history were. Their magnetism," that applies 
to Francis Ford Coppola. It definitely applies to Enzo Ferrari.

And so I don't think we can overstate the importance of being able to be persuasive, to be able 
to communicate with other humans and the impact it's going to have on your work. Reminds 
me, if you read, though, the biography of Warren Buffett, right, I mean there's a bunch of them, 
but he mentions this over and over again. And he says like, the best investment he ever made 
was the $100 he spent for the Dale Carnegie public speaking course. And I think that statement 
speaks volumes.

And if you don't already have this ability, like he's clearly telling you, "Hey, find a way to learn. It's 
just a skill. Like any other one, you can learn how to do it.

Let's go back to this paragraph. What's also surprising is even though he knew he was 
persuasive, he knew he was able to -- I mean manipulate, that's the word he's going to use, he 
does have a little bit of impostor syndrome because he's still like this poor, uneducated kid.

Despite his obvious powers of persuasion and his sufficiently vivid personality to push his ways 
into the inner sanctums of the Alfa Romeo test department, Ferrari remained gripped by his 
lower-class bumpkin image. At one point, he lamented, 'I feel so provincial.' But that sense of 
inadequacy was more than compensated for his" -- this is really like the way to think about this, 
"By his street-wise cunning and a brash ability to deal with the social and professional superiors 
like a man twice his age."

So he's also doing races. I'm skipping over most of that part because he was -- I mean, by his 
own admission, not a great race car driver, way better at obviously being the agitator of men. 
But this is the problem that a young Enzo is trying to solve, why he's doing the work at Alfa 
Romeo.

"The modest firm of Alfa Romeo was still operating in the minor leagues of the automobile 
racing business. Chances of their victory in major events seemed a distant hope because they're 
going against the mighty Fiat, Mercedes," all these other people that have way more resources 
than they do at this point in history. "It was simply too great to even consider a high placing in 
the major Grand Prix events. But Ferrari plunged into his job with typical vigor."

It is around this time, though, that he's going to start making more money he's ever made in his 
life, and that's going to come from actual car sales. So it says, "His aggressive sales tactics 
permitted him to become an exclusive sales agent for Alfa Romeo automobiles," in this little 
section of Italy that he's in. I'm going to skip the name.

By urging -- "by using his growing reputation as a racing driver, he artfully enhanced the 
marquee image among the rich clientele in the region. As his financial fortunes in the car 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 8 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ss

s  LLC.



business increased, his racing career entered into a severe decline." He is 24 years old.

And so as his racing career declines, he does something smart. He realizes that the failure of his 
one dream, right, is -- remember, when he looked at his friend when he was like, what, 18, what, 
however old he was, maybe 19. "I'm going to be a race car driver." That was his dream, right? But 
his failure on one dream leads to discovery of his true talent. It's something that he's going to do 
for the rest of his life.

"For all his attempts at reaching the big time of major league racing, Enzo Ferrari would be 
doomed to the role of spectator. Yet his stature as an organizer and leader of men would soar to 
unexpected heights because he was able to strengthen the Alfa Romeo team and aid in 
propelling it to the very pinnacle of the sport."

And so as he's turning around the fortunes of Alfa Romeo, he's introduced to the very real 
specter of death that this sport produces, which is unbelievable. I think the best description of 
that is that little fun book I did on Founders #97, Go Like Hell. If also you've seen -- if you've 
seen the movie Ford v Ferrari with Christian Bale, Matt Damon, Matt Damon plays Carroll Shelby. 
I also did a podcast on Carroll Shelby.

Carroll Shelby is by far one of the most likable founders I've ever read. He just -- there's a bunch 
of interviews with him on YouTube right before he died. And it's like -- I think he's like in his 80s. 
He's just hilarious. I love that guy. But that's who -- Matt Damon plays him in that movie if you 
haven't seen it. You could also listen to Founders #99. That's Carroll Shelby.

So we see that he just -- death, how much death is involved in this sport, it's just unbelievable. 
This is going to be his mentor, the one that hired him. "Ugo spun off one of the ultrafast bends 
and was killed. Ugo was gone. The man who had brought Ferrari into the sport and given him his 
first chance to drive was dead. He would be the first of literally dozens of men who would fall 
around Ferrari, victims of this crudest of sports."

So this is where we see that Enzo just really made the smart decision to alter his focus, and he 
had a talent for recruiting highly talented employees. And so he winds up recruiting two of the 
best engineers and also drivers. He does this -- I mean this is his MO, right? This is his playbook 
for his whole life actually.

And what happens is now you have this Alfa Romeo team, which was the underdog, beating 
Fiat, which wasn't supposed to happen. And so it says, "While Ferrari could accept no credit for 
beating Fiat on the track" -- meaning he wasn't driving, "His contribution to their overall defeat 
by aiding in the defection of Bazzi and Jano" -- these are people he recruited, "Was pivotal.

Following the Paris flight, the once unbeatable Fiat racing department was in shambles. Their 
losses prompted Fiat to drop racing after the 1924 season. A short-lived return would be made a 
few years later. But for all intents and purposes, they departed the sport forever.

Considering Enzo's deeply rooted sense of honor and his need for revenge" -- remember, this is 
the firm that would not hire him, "One can be sure that this capitulation by the company had 
been rejected -- that had rejected him six years earlier was lustily celebrated by Enzo Ferrari."

That just also popped into my mind as I'm rereading this. There is so many opportunities that are 
outside of Enzo's control that he benefits from just by showing up. This idea that Fiat gives up, 
cars break down, they don't get through immigration, Enzo was obsessed. He was -- most car 
racing teams at the time would say, "Hey, focus on whatever." There's all these like different -- 
focus on Grand Prix or focus on this country or focus on this one type of race. And Enzo was 
like, "No, I'm going to -- if there's a race, I'm showing up."

And so they wouldn't have -- now that'd be crazy, wouldn't be able to do that. You'd have 
Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine

Page 9 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lossus, LLC.



specialized cars, everything else. They would just retrofit really fast. Like if maybe you had a car 
-- a long-endurance race, so you need to have a different type of vehicle for that. Maybe you 
have one that's just going around the same track, like Indy 500, so you have a car for that. 
Maybe you have a street race, it's 1,000 miles. You have a car for that. Enzo was just like, "No, 
I'm showing up at everything."

Triumphant & Persevering
So this idea, I just realized, that prompted Fiat to drop out, he wins a lot almost by default by the 
fact that he just shows up. I think there's a huge message there. It goes back to what Steve 
Jobs told us, "Half of what separate" -- his famous quote that I'll never forget, and I think it's so 
important for people to repeat over and over again, what Steve Jobs said, "Half of what 
separates the successful entrepreneurs from the not successful ones is just pure perseverance." 
Perseverance, persistence, whatever you want to call it, Enzo had that in spades.

So now we get to -- when Enzo is 31 years old, this is going to be the start of the Scuderia 
Ferrari. And that word just means racing stable. It's kind of like a -- it's a joint venture of sorts 
between Enzo Ferrari and Alfa Romeo. It says, with their money and Ferrari's connections and 
racing expertise, why not pool their talents and form a Scuderia? The deal would be simple. It 
would be -- a limited partnership would be formed in which the shareholders would set up an 
operation to buy, race and perhaps someday build high-performance cars.

And so this is what Enzo's going to do for quite a while. It's almost like two decades, something 
like that, maybe 15 years from this point in the story before he sets out on his own, like under his 
own name, that is. But this section is really about the fact that he felt triumphant. He gets to 
return to the city of his birth, and he's now transformed himself at a rather young age from 
agent and employee to the founder of his own company.

Ferrari symbolically viewed the formation of the new Scuderia as a triumphant homecoming to a 
place that, save for a few racing enthusiasts, had ignored his presence. "My return to Modena 
was kind of a mental revolt," he later wrote. "When I went away, I had merely some slight 
reputation for being a strange" -- this is hilarious. This is how people thought of him before -- 
when he left away -- or when he went away, rather. "When I went away, I had merely some slight 
reputation for being a strange young man keen on cars and racing but did not seem to have any 
particular capability."

So now what is this? This is like 12 years has passed since that point, right? "My return, in order 
to transform myself from a racing driver and team organizer into a small industrialist, 
represented an attempt to prove to myself and others that during the 20 years I was with Alfa 
Romeo, not all my reputation was secondhand and gained by the efforts and skills of other 
people. The time had come for me to see how far I could get on my own efforts."

Now this is what I mentioned earlier, that there is always a blueprint in these books. They're 
usually somebody has -- they see somebody that came before them, and they're like, "I want 
that." And for Ferrari, Maserati brothers were also racing and producing cars under their own 
name, which is what Ferrari wants to do. But largely, his blueprint was Bugatti.

And so here, it says, "If there was ever a prototype operation for what Enzo Ferrari envisioned 
for the Scuderia, it had to be the legendary" -- I don't know how to pronounce his first name, 
but we all know his last name, "Bugatti."

"This part" -- this is how they describe Bugatti. And this is really interesting because I've heard 
the car name -- the car, I knew they sell for like $1 million, something crazy like that, maybe 
more, but I didn't know much about the person. I should actually see if I can find a biography on 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 10 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colo
su

, LLC.



him. "This part artist, part engineer, part entrepreneur, part sculptor has, since 1910, created an 
automotive fiefdom in a tiny village.

The Bugatti estate included a" -- and we talk about it a lot, the benefit of building your own 
world within a world, right? That's kind of what company building can be, and then you can also 
do that to more elements of your life. But check this out. This Bugatti literally made his own 
world. It sounds fantastic.

So he has this little automotive fiefdom in a tiny village. "The Bugatti estate included a small, 
elegant inn for the entertainment of guests and customers, a stable of thoroughbred horses, 
and the factory itself. His automobiles were and remain a stunning combination of industrial 
aesthetics and the jewelers' art. It looks as if Fabergé had somehow been able to motorize an 
egg.

And I think -- the book gives some detail about the character that Bugatti was. He like dressed 
in costume and everything. It's just hilarious. I love seeing people who's like, "Hey, I got one life. 
I'm going do whatever I want, and I'm going to really live it."

Bugatti was just one of a bevy of colorful eccentrics, this -- nobles, playboy, dreamy 
commoners, and hard-eyed egomaniacs who populated the world of European motorsports in 
the 1930s. He certainly -- this is still about Bugatti. "He certainly stood above the rest in terms 
of lifestyle. He had created a feudal barony around the spidery machines he manufactured in 
limited quantities and sold only to those he personally deemed worthy. By contrast, Enzo Ferrari 
was then still a drab, simple journeyman laboring in a small garage in an Italian backwater.

That is such an important point. "The example Bugatti was setting did not escape him. 
Everybody has" -- there's always a blueprint. Bugatti was Ferrari's blueprint. This is so important. 
"Bugatti was a prototype for success. He was manufacturing cars for the very wealthy and 
fielding his own team of professional and wealthy amateurs." This is exactly what Ferrari wants 
to do. "Surely, if Bugatti could succeed at this, a similar concept could be developed on a more 
modest basis for Ferrari."

So Ferrari is extremely gifted at running a team, recruiting the best people, provoking them, 
poking them, motivating them, manipulating them. So I guess a fantastic success in this new 
Ferrari Scuderia -- or actually, no, Scuderia Ferrari, sorry. It's fantastic and successful.

And so as we've seen before, basically, what I'm trying to tell you here, I know you read this, too. 
So sales of -- now they're racing cars, and then what happens when you win races? You get a 
ton of publicity. People are going to want that car. "So sales to private customers were thriving 
and would continue to grow as the Scuderia's success on the racetracks extended in" -- excuse 
me, "Expanded in number and magnitude."

So what hit me now is because -- since the last time I read biography on Enzo Ferrari, I have 
read two biographies on Michael Jordan. And I realized Ferrari sold cars, and Michael Jordan 
sells shoes for the same reason: humans are attracted to winners.

And so on this podcast so far, I've mentioned, I don't know, two or three times that Enzo Ferrari 
is going to go down in history as the greatest car manufacturer of all time. That is also stated in 
the movie -- there's a scene from the movie Ford v Ferrari, and I'm going to read the transcript 
to you right now.

And so we're going to have -- the first character is -- it's like Henry Ford II's like right-hand 
executive. I forgot his name. So for this, I'm going to call him Douche because that's what he is. 
And then he's talking to Lee Iacocca. And before Lee Iacocca became super famous and well-
known -- because he winds up taking over the Chrysler Corporation and kind of like bringing it 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 11 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



back from the dead. But before he did that, he worked at Ford.

And so this is the scene between Douche and Lee Iacocca from the movie Ford v Ferrari. They're 
all in a meeting. Henry Ford II is sitting there, and the Douche says, "In the last three years, you 
and your" -- he's talking to Lee Iacocca. "In the last three years, you and your marketing team 
have presided over the worst sales slump in history. Why should Mr. Ford listen to you?"

This is what Lee Iacocca says, "Because we've been thinking wrong. Ferrari, they have won four 
out of the five -- last five Le Mans. We need to think like Ferrari." Now we're in the 1960s. This is 
the time period it's happening. The Douche says, "Ferrari makes fewer cars in a year than we do 
in a day. We spend more on toilet paper than they do on their entire output. You want us to think 
like them?"

And so Lee's response is perfect. "Enzo Ferrari will go down in history as the greatest car 
manufacturer of all time. Why? Is it because he built the most cars? No. It's because of what his 
cars mean: victory. When Ferrari wins a Le Mans, people want some of that victory. What if the 
Ford badge meant victory and meant it where it counts, with the first group of 17-year-olds in 
history with money in their pockets?" And so when he says that, Henry Ford II like sits up and 
starts paying attention.

And so the Douche says, "This would take decades to develop a race team that's capable of 
taking out Ferrari." So then Lee walks over to him, throws his folder on the table, and he says, 
"Ferrari is bankrupt. Enzo spent every lira," the currency of Italy. "He got chasing perfection. You 
know something? He got there. Now he's broke."

And so that scene, what Lee is also saying at the end, where it's like Ferrari's bankrupt, he spent 
every dollar chasing perfection, this is -- he's got something in common with other -- Enzo's got 
in common with other -- some of the greatest founders in history have all similar patterns. Walt 
Disney, Steve Jobs, they would spend every dollar they had improving the product.

There's a great line in one of Walt Disney's biographies where his brother is the one that's like 
dealt with the financing of the company and always had to like fight Walt and his crazy 
perfectionism. And his brother is like, "What is this going to cost?" He's like, "I'm innovating. I'll 
tell you what it costs when I'm done." There's just no way that Walt was going to compromise 
his vision for perfection. That's why you see the company he built. He built one of the greatest 
companies in human history.

Steve Jobs is the same way. And this is very early. He's like -- it was in the mid-1980s, Steve 
Jobs goes to talk to -- I think it was Stanford. I can't remember the -- anyway, most likely had to 
be Stanford. And the business school students are asking questions and like asking about the 
stock price. And he like completely waves off their answers, like, "I don't give a s*** about the 
stock price."

He's like -- and then he launches into the fact that he's going to -- one day, he's going to build a 
computer that you can hold in your hand, like some kind of common -- almost like the early 
version like the iPad. And he talked about like his passion for making and selling great products. 
He's like, "No, my focus is on making the very best product possible. It's not on making the most 
money."

Walt Disney was the same way. Steve Jobs is the same way. And Enzo Ferrari was the exact 
same way.

So anyways, let me wrap this -- tie this background to what we were talking about in the book, 
is the fact that -- we talked about Jordan. Like if Jordan didn't win all these championships, if he 
wasn't regarded as the greatest player of his generation, no one would buy his shoes.

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 12 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colo
su

, LLC.



And then you fast forward 20 years after he's retired, his shoe brand is doing over $3 billion a 
year. He gets a 5% royalty of sales. That means Jordan right now, 20 years after he stopped 
playing the game, is making $150 million a year just from his shoes.

And it also ties into the idea of why you should keep it -- that's the Naval quote, that you should 
keep redefining what you do until you're the best in the world at it. It's not like the second-best 
player, the second-best person in the NBA sells 10% or 20% or 50% of the shoe volume. Jordan 
gets almost all the profits.

I just think there's -- what I'm trying to say is like all these -- they seem like seemingly disparate 
ideas. If you combine them, there's a lot of like information there that's useful to our careers. 
The idea that humans are attracted to the best, so they flock to whatever that is, it could be the 
best shoe, the best car, the best purse, it doesn't matter.

And then if you can somehow identify, even if it's just a tiny niche to be the best in whatever 
field you're in rather, you have these disproportionate returns. And part of being the best in 
what -- if you're going to be the best in the world at something, you have to be obsessed with it. 
Steve Jobs was obsessed with his work. Walt Disney was obsessed with his work. Enzo Ferrari 
was obsessed with his work. They all produced the best product in their category.

So I hope that makes sense. I hope I could tie that together. It's just very obvious, when you 
start reading across all these different biographies, like, okay, these people all think differently, 
but they think differently in the same way. They are more closely aligned with each other than 
they are with like the average person on the street.

I need to go fast forward in the book, though, because I have a ton of highlights, and I'm going 
to be here all day talking to you about this. This is going to be like an audiobook, for God's sake.

Okay. Let's see. This is acting like a champion before he was a champion, a formidable individual, 
in complete control of his organization. So it says, "The persona of the man who is running the 
operation was beginning to take shape, that would remain consistent throughout its life. While 
still only in his mid-30s, Ferrari was firmly in control of the operation and given to fits of temper 
that would descend on the place like summer thunderstorms.

A badly fabricated part" -- remember, they're -- so they're focused on racing, but they're making 
cars to fund their racing operation. And he -- you can think of him as the exact opposite of Ford, 
right? It's very interesting that they even had a negotiation. I don't personally think Enzo even 
considered selling to them.

But the idea, Ford had this leading -- if you go and listen to my podcast I did on Henry Ford, like 
he figured out how to apply mass production techniques to automobiles before anybody else 
did, right? And he was better at it than anybody else. Ferrari is in the opposite end of the 
spectrum. These are handmade products built by Italian artisans, okay? It's not at all what -- like 
it's a complete opposite strategy that Henry Ford took.

So it says," A badly fabricated part or the late arrival of a worker would send his temper soaring 
and strong men scurrying for cover. At the same time, he could be a model of decorum, 
transforming himself into a charming maître d' when the moment demanded it as when a 
highborn noble or a Fascist official member were in" -- this is Italy before World War II, right, "Or 
a Fascist arrived at the scuderia or a wealthy customer expressed interest in spending extra.

Enzo Ferrari was on his way to becoming the consummate manager of men." This is repeated 
100 times in the book, that his greatest skill was the fact that he was able to manage people, to 
recruit the very best talent, to manage them, to manipulate them. He's not doing the work. He's 
not the engineer. He's not the designer. He's the agitator of men. I can't -- like I can't repeat that 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 13 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssus, LLC.



enough, okay?

He was -- "Enzo Ferrari was on his way to becoming the consummate manager of men, not 
docile, soft-willed men, but proud, fiercely competitive, egocentric men" -- these are drivers 
we're talking about now, "Whose livelihood, if not their very reason for living, depended on this 
most demanding and unforgiving of sports."

So in between all these highlights, there's a lot of people dying. There's some sick stories in the 
book, like maybe the driver -- and the driver -- and like two drivers might die, but the crash like 
results in the car going into the field -- into the stand -- or not even stands. They're racing on 
the road, for God's sake, and 20 people or 20 spectators dying. It's insane.

So it says, for the -- but he's also extremely successful at winning races. "For the first time since 
its formation, Ferrari Scuderia could be considered at the top level of the business. It was able to 
compete head-to-head with the likes of Bugatti and Maserati. For all the death and acrimony, 
Enzo Ferrari could look back on the past season with a certain satisfaction."

Will to Win
And this is -- I double underline this point because this jumps out. If you study Enzo Ferrari, also 
very useful trait for us to have, "befitting only a man with a diamond-hard will to win at all costs." 
So you could imagine, if you're traveling all over the world, you've got drivers dying, you've got 
these complex machines that you're having to build essentially from scratch, there's all kinds of 
moving parts. They constantly don't like -- don't go to -- things don't go to plan.

So this important -- like the important ability to have like -- the ability to adapt, to be flexible, 
the ability for improvisation, these are all very, very common traits in the history of 
entrepreneurship. Enzo Ferrari is no different.

I just want to pull out a couple of sentences here because I thought this was absolutely 
fantastic. So it's discussing like all the stuff that happens. And it says, "If they were to survive, it 
would be thanks to their wits and their ability" -- check this line out, "And their ability to play the 
ancient game of life. Few men understood this game better than Ferrari."

I just love that idea. "If they were to survive, it would be thanks to their wits and their ability to 
play the ancient game of life." And if you think about the people that we're starting on the 
podcast together, we're not setting people that are great at school. We're setting people that 
were great at life.

I want to go into more about the eccentricities of Enzo Ferrari. He got a lot of weird phobias. 
Also extremely -- I think I have more highlights later on, but this guy was extremely adherent to 
routine. He had almost the same routine for the last like 60 years of his life. It's remarkable. I 
don't know if I'd want to live my life that way, but I'm saying he's adherent to that.

So it says, "Ferrari would refuse to fly. He was suspicious of trains and would only travel by 
automobile. He would not use elevators. He maintained a less than wholly analytical view of 
life's technical complexities.

Now this section I thought was interesting because you have somebody that worked for both 
Bugatti and Ferrari. And he gives us some insight here. And so it says, "Now the Scuderia was a 
bareboned, hard-muscled professional racing operation." So he's describing Ferrari at that -- the 
point he comes in. This immediately became apparent to outsiders like Dreyfus, who later wrote, 
"The difference between being a member of the Bugatti team and the Ferrari was virtually night 
and day.

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 14 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ss

s, LLC.



With Ferrari, I learned the business of racing for there was no doubt that he was a businessman. 
Enzo Ferrari loved racing. Of that there was no question. It was more than an enthusiast's love 
but one tempered with the practical realization that this was a good way to build a nice, 
profitable empire. I knew that he was going to be a big man one day." Bugatti was a patron. Enzo 
Ferrari was the boss. Bugatti was imperious. Ferrari was impenetrable.

So now he's about to turn 40. I want to give you a description of what I mentioned at the 
beginning -- very beginning of the podcast, something that I most admire about him. It says, 
"He just had a singular focus." Now I don't think -- like he obviously didn't have a balanced life.

So my own personal blueprint, I've told you over and over again, is at Founders #93, I think 
because he identified like a handful of things and was good at all of them and didn't make the 
same mistakes that a lot of people make where they overoptimize for their work at the expense 
of like personal life.

But I want to read -- actually, I'm going to read a quote from that book Go Like Hell, and then I'm 
going to go back to this book. It's describing, "Enzo Ferrari in Go Like Hell. He worked seven 
days a week, 12 to 16 hours a day, holidays included. At night, he returned to Modena. He felt 
extremely emotionally attached to his city. Except for his daily drives to Maranello where his 
factory is, he refused to leave Modena for almost any reason. He did not attend races, not even 
the Italian Grand Prix, one of the world's most famous circuits.

When asked about the root of his mania, his obsession with victory, Ferrari told one reporter in 
1958, 'Everything I've done, I did because I couldn't do anything less. One day, I want to build a 
car that's faster than all of them, and then I want to die.'"

So these kind of statements, this is why I can describe him as one of history's greatest 
obsessives. That's 1958. So this is in the future. We're still not there yet. This is maybe a decade, 
a decade and a half earlier, something like that. He's now at 40 completely focused on work. He 
lives a simple no-frills life.

So it says, "Enzo Ferrari was immersed in the life of a full-time racing capo, with all of his 
energies concentrated on the team's competition schedule. Ferrari was still living frugally in a 
tiny two-bedroom apartment above the factory" -- or the racing team actually, the Scuderia. 
"Ferrari was a hard taskmaster. He had increasingly limited travel schedule. The little family fell 
into the daily pattern of lower-middle-class Italian life. Enzo Ferrari was born with simple tastes. 
And even after he became rich and prominent, he retained the ways of a simple, uncluttered 
man.

During the 1930s, every ounce of his energies and every lira in his pocket was being plowed 
back into the business. He lived a modest frugal life.

And so you see that he's completely dedicated to this. It is not a job. It is a passion. It's 
something he loves. You can actually tell a lot about people by not only who they admire but 
who they dislike.

And so there is a -- the government of Italy gets involved in all kinds of stuff. I'm going to skip 
over a large part of that in the book. But they wind up putting in place like these bureaucrats, 
you can think about them. They're like more like analytical.

Enzo had soul in the game. And so this is a description of the person he hated more than anyone 
else. And you see kind of -- he views himself as the opposite. "The same analytical approach to 
problems that Gobbato" -- that's the guy that he hates, "This instantly placed him at 
loggerheads with Enzo Ferrari."

A group -- so it talks about Enzo and his group. It said how they differed. "They were a group 
Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine

Page 15 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colos
, LLC.



without formal training who relied on a mixture of racetrack empiricism and raw instinct to 
create machines.

I'm sorry, this guy's name is Ricart. He's saying, "This guy Ricart had the same analytical 
approach as Gobbato." So Ricart's the guy that he hates. "Ricart had no abiding passion for 
motor racing." So Enzo's going to be disgusted by this guy. "He was a pure mechanical engineer 
by trade and tended to approach each project with the kind of aloof methodology that made 
him more akin to a surgeon than a grease-stained racing-car mechanic."

There's like this whole, like, battle that goes on. It's going to wind up leading to Alfa Romeo 
buying out most of -- buying out Enzo Ferrari. This is also going to lead after the wars over to 
Enzo creating Ferrari, the company that we know today.

"Alfa Romeo bought 80% of the Scuderia Ferrari. The struggle was long and difficult. After all, 
Enzo Ferrari was the commodore of Alfa Romeo's Grand Prix racing program. To lose this 
position had to imply failure or at least displeasure in the eyes of his superiors. This -- the period 
of 1938 to -- the period of 1935 to 1938 was laden with frustration for a man who wore his" -- 
here, describing Enzo, "Who wore his pride on his sleeve and who for 15 years had assiduously 
and successfully curried favor with the company hierarchy."

So the author goes on for quite a few pages about this war, this battle between Ferrari and 
Ricart, and all these other people that's going to force him out. But I want to draw your attention 
to the fact that Enzo knew what his talent was, which is another smart move by him. "I have 
never considered myself a designer or an inventor but only one who gets things moving and 
keeps them running, my innate talent for stirring up men."

"This is where Enzo Ferrari was at his best, immersed in the genesis of a daring new design that 
he believed would bring victory on the racetrack. As the summer heat of Modena bore down on 
them, transforming the workshop into a fuming hell of simmering, deafening, maddening 
motion" -- Enzo had a -- he just loved chaos. "He seemed to gain strength.

Each night, the exhausted team would gather in one of the little shops -- or excuse me, 
restaurants around the neighborhood to eat and to muse about their progress, then they'd fall in 
bed for a few hours' sleep before beginning again at dawn."

And so that's seven days a week, 12- to 16-hour schedule that he imposed on himself, he also 
imposed on everybody around him, no holidays. I don't -- he doesn't pay attention to any of 
that, doesn't really pay attention to any current affairs, anything. He's just all about racing, like 
that one singular focus that he maintained from the 1930s until the day he died, I think in 1988, 
something like that.

So eventually, this Ricart guy is going to win this battle. This is when Enzo was forced out of 
Alfa Romeo, not necessarily a bad thing for him. "Enzo's dismissal from Alfa Romeo was clearly a 
greater blow to his ego than to his bank account. The buyout of the Scuderia and severance 
payments left him in solid financial shape." So he had a nice little nest egg going, and he doesn't 
really spend money on anything but his cars. "He maintained a simple life, still living in a small 
apartment on the second floor of the old Scuderia building.

Enzo Ferrari could look back on the past 20 years with considerable satisfaction. He had begun 
with nothing, save for a tiny inheritance from his father and, through hard work and chutzpah, 
had become a major figure in international motorsports. He was 41 years old."

So this is actually still before World War II. I don't know if I misspoke earlier. "His severance 
agreement had stipulated that he could not use the old Scuderia Ferrari name or directly engage 
in motor racing for four years. Therefore, Ferrari set to work establishing a custom machine 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 16 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssus, LLC.



shop." So he uses some of his nest egg to start this other company. "He invested substantial 
capital on equipping the old building with lathes, milling machines, grinders and shapers."

So this is more about his intensity that I was just mentioning. Two people that want him to build, 
two guys come to him to build a pair of sports cars for this legendary race. It's called like the 
Mille Miglia. I've looked up how to pronounce that. That's the best I can do, I'm sorry. And so he 
said, "Okay, I'll build them." And then he says, he reaches -- he's like, "Okay, agreed." He reached 
this decision at a dinner on Christmas Eve in 1939.

"When most families were together on one of the holiest nights of the year, Enzo Ferrari was 
conducting business. Christmas Eve was a sacred time reserved for family gatherings and 
obligations" -- obligatory, that's not the word, "Mandatory attendance at Church services. That 
Enzo Ferrari would spend such a period with racing associates underscores not only the singular 
intensity with which he engaged in business but also the hypocrisy of his testimonials of 
devotion to his wife and son.

This behavior was hardly unusual for him, and others also found him boring ahead with his work 
on various Easter Sundays, Christmases or any other of the multitude of holidays and feast days 
that dot the Italian calendar."

So fast forwarding throughout the war, like his factory gets bombed by the Allies multiple times. 
After the war, the electricity in Italy is scarce, product -- like materials are scarce, and this is the 
environment. And he says, "Hey, I'm going start my own company." This is Ferrari. And it says -- 
and this is the reason. So he closes down. Now he's -- many years have passed. He can use that 
name again. He can get back into racing.

"His reason for returning to the automobile business was simple: it was all he knew. The machine 
tools had been a transitional -- had been transitional stop-gaps for the duration of the war. But 
his reputation, his contacts, his passion centered on cars. And there was no logical reason that 
this would not be his area of concentration once the fighting stopped."

And so another way to think about that is he knew what his circle of competence was, and he 
was going to stay within that for the rest of his life. I need to point out something here when 
he's building his first car, one of his first cars, that's extremely important. And this is an idea that 
people are like, "Oh, I need to innovate it." Like you don't.

Like he was not -- Rolls-Royce was the exact same way about what I'm going to read to you, 
because I've read the biography of the founding engineering genius of Rolls-Royce, Henry 
Royce. And his method was taking existing product. The Rolls-Royce method is the same 
method that Enzo Ferrari is using, is what I'm trying to tell you: take an existing product and 
make every part of it better.

So it says, "No Ferrari ever built was a glittering example of daring technology. The V12 that 
they're making right now is one of the very few examples in the history of the company that 
could be described as remotely revolutionary." This is so important. "If Ferrari was so insistent on 
original ideas, his company would not have got off the ground for it never ever introduced a new 
idea."

And he describes this perfectly in one sentence, "All we wanted to do was build a conventional 
engine but one that was outstanding." So again, I think this is really important, just take an 
existing product and make every part of it better.

So I want to go back to Chinetti that I told you about earlier. He's going to develop the 
American market that proves to be extremely lucrative for Ferrari. And I got to point this out, like 
he's, what? 48 years old at this point in the story. Things are not really going well for his 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 17 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col
sus, LLC.



company. Like again, post-World War II, there's not a lot of money. There's not a lot of 
electricity. There's not a lot of products.

So they were in a meeting. "He found Enzo Ferrari in the same dingy two-story building. Ferrari 
was in a bad way. He looked haggard beyond his 48 years. His eyes were red-rimmed with 
fatigue. His hulking frame was slumped behind a desk in the large, unheated office.

On that day in the dingy icebox, they spoke of the future. Each tried to conjure up some 
optimism, but it came in brief spurts, only to fade into the morass of broken dreams." So 
Chinetti had been in America.

And so this is what -- he's like, "Hey, let me be your guy that can bring your products" -- 
because Enzo never visited America. He wasn't really interested in it at all. He wasn't really 
interested in anything except his like little town and his factory.

And so Chinetti plays an extremely important role. "Chinetti spoke of his years in America where 
a war effort had been mounted that by comparison made Italian industrialists look like little 
potters."

So what Chinetti observed and what he's describing is what is the American material output 
during World War II. I did an entire podcast on this. It's in between, I think, Founders #168 and 
169. It's a bonus episode. It's called Freedom's Forge. And I found that book because it was 
recommended by Patrick Collison. Patrick Collison is the founder and CEO of Stripe.

I told you this before, if you go to patrickcollison.com/fast, Patrick, like most great founders, has 
this deep historical knowledge, and he collects examples of groups of people doing really hard 
things really quickly, which, of course, is probably what he's thinking like building out Stripe, 
right, doing something extremely hard with a group of people really quickly.

And so if you want to -- you read the book, I mean Patrick recommended it, he's got a really 
interesting mind. And if you want to check out that podcast before you read the book, you'll 
have a good overview of what's taking place.

Building the Best Race Car
But this is what Chinetti is about to tell Ferrari. It says, "In the rush to spit out millions of 
airplanes, tanks, trucks, rifles, landing craft, prefabricated buildings, portable bridges, helmets" -- 
it just goes on and on. I'm just going to skip over that part, okay? "And God knows what else, the 
American colossus had created miraculous tools of mass production assembly-line techniques 
so ingenious that full-size cargo ships could be built by a man named Kaiser." He is referencing 
Henry Kaiser. I did a podcast on him. That's Founders #66. The reason you should listen to that is 
because he built over 100 companies in his day, built the Hoover Dam. He was -- Henry Kaiser 
was as famous in his time as like Elon Musk is today.

So it says, "They were so ingenious that full-size cargo ships could be built by a man named 
Kaiser in less than a week. 'How,' asked Chinetti, 'Could Ferrari hope to compete against this 
Western industrial might?'" Enzo is not going to because he understood you can't out-Ford 
Ford, right? So you go in the complete opposite direction.

And why is that an opening for them? Because Chinetti realizes, "There is a rich upper class 
whose taste were European" -- in America, that is. "He had seen them, met them, and gained 
their trust. They would pay a king's ransom for such elite machines and he" -- Luigi Chinetti. Did I 
pronounce his name wrong earlier? Luigi, Luigi Chinetti. "Meant to exploit that naïve colonial 
lust.

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 18 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lo

sus, LLC.



Chinetti was firm: build five cars a year for America, and he would sell them for unseemly 
amounts of money. Give him the opportunity, and he would sell 20 a year, a number on that 
dank day" -- This is the whole point of why I'm reading this to you because think about how far 
Ferrari has come. This is now, what, 60 -- what are we, 70 years after this conversation. I mean 
there's a Ferrari dealership right next to my house that has more than 20 Ferraris in there, right?

So he's like, "Build -- give me 20 a year. I will sell 20 a year," and "a number that on that dank day 
in Modena sounded as astronomical as if they had been discussing General Motors' annual 
output. Ferrari agreed."

And so the way he's going to sell cars is still the way -- the best way he knows. This is a simple 
idea, but it's not easy. It's the same thing that Jordan says. Jordan says, "The marketing I did for 
my business was on the court. If I won championships, I would sell shoes." If Ferrari wins races, 
he's going to sell cars.

"The rules were simple: build successful racing cars that improve the image of the company, and 
rich men will flock to the door to obtain similar cars with which to play out their fantasies. By 
announcing the new line of cars, he could expect a flurry of orders from wealthy sportsmen and 
perhaps an infusion of deposit funds to carry on the work. He did not have a lot of money."

This is very similar to early days of Tesla. They start selling this Roadster for $250,000 or 
whatever it is. I mean I guess they still do this to the day with the new Roadster. They were 
taking deposits of like $50,000, gives the company capital upfront to actually go and build a 
car. Ferrari is doing that 70 years ago or whatever it was.

So I mentioned earlier that Enzo benefits just because he shows up everywhere. And he lets -- 
as long as he survives, he lets his competitors make mistakes. Maserati, they've gotten away 
now that -- they're started by the Maserati Brothers. This other industrialist named like Orsi, he 
buys it. And this is really what Steve Jobs talked about over and over again on the benefit of 
focusing on one product. Maserati didn't learn this lesson. And really, they lose focus, and Ferrari 
does not.

And so Maserati goes from building race cars and really fast cars, so now they want to develop a 
grand touring car. Maserati was also going to continue manufacturing machine tools. And then 
they wanted to make an electric truck, "thereby removing itself from direct competition with 
Ferrari. This alteration of direction by Maserati was the first of a series of tactical errors that 
would ultimately take their company out of the ranks of the elite automakers." It's all about 
focus.

While Steve Jobs talked about this over and over again, "Focus is saying no," Maserati, run by a 
different person, is not able to say no. "While Ferrari was zeroing in on the tiny world of exotic 
cars, Maserati was doing just the opposite: expanding in a variety of directions and thereby 
blurring the focus of the old, much-honored firm. The decision was to reap both long and short-
term benefits for Ferrari."

I talked about this in the other two Ferrari podcasts as well that he would constantly limit 
production, made his products more lusted after, more exclusive. So at this point, they're going 
on for a while. They've only built 70 cars. Now they're building them by hand, like I mentioned 
earlier. And the people buying them, it's like the world's elite. So you have Prince this person and 
King this person and Emperor this person and Shah of this country and Crown Prince -- I'm just 
listing, reading you this list. Then you have people like the du Ponts who were one of the 
wealthiest American families at the time.

All -- this is who he targeted first. Customers or other wealthy customers would travel all over 
the world just to his little factory in Maranello rather. And he'd be giving a tour and the customer 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 19 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssu

, LLC.



is like, "I want one." And he'd have like unused unsold cars out back, and he's like, "Oh, sorry, you 
can't have one." He would just tell them, "No, it's going to be a year, two years."

So he did this intentionally. He understood that if you tell somebody no, especially somebody 
who's wealthy, powerful, used to getting their way, it only makes them desire that object more. 
So as time goes on, he's still building the company, still focused on racing. We see his explicit 
goal.

"Enzo Ferrari had clung to the dream of becoming what he called a grand constructor. He's like, 
'I don't consider myself an industrialist. I'm a constructor.'" That's how he described himself. In 
addition to -- and then he was able -- he got to his goal of being a grand constructor by being 
an agitator of men. Those are two ideas that are linked together. "The classic manufacturer of 
complete racing cars and high-performance road automobiles for a select clientele of elite 
enthusiasts." That's what he's trying to do.

"Only a few men in history had achieved such an elevated status, most prominently Bugatti and 
then" -- so Bugatti in Italy and Bentley in Europe -- or excuse me, in England rather. So this goes 
back to what's most important to a manufacturer. I told you he had a strict adherence to this 
schedule of his, and this is, in my opinion, some of the best writing in the book.

"This man, so rooted in time and place that he never slept out of his own bed for the final 40 
years of his life. His automobile business was not a means to an end. It was the end, the very 
essence of his being. In the final analysis, the fast cars, the Grand Prix victory, the factory itself 
were all secondary to what they stood for: the towering ego of the man whose name they 
carried, Enzo Ferrari.

His personal style was an extreme contrast to the automobiles he created. They were flashy, 
high-styled, daring, brash, openly outrageous. He was drab, mundane, semimonastic. Ferrari 
remained a simple man with simple tastes. In his automobiles, there seemed to be a 
transference of his powerful ego and the need to express himself artistically, but in personal 
terms, he was muted and introverted to the point of obsession."

And let's go back to what he felt what his greatest skill was and maybe the most -- the greatest 
skill one can possibly have if you want to build a successful organization or team, right? His 
greatest skill was recruiting talented people. "It is often said that his greatest skill was his ability 
to recognize talent. This is probably true."

And I thought Ferrari had a really counterintuitive point on losing. I want to bring to your 
attention. So there's a writer for The New York Times, this guy named Daley, and he's spending 
some time with Ferrari. It says, "Daley observed that Ferrari appeared to be happier when he was 
losing, which jibes with the mechanics" -- the mechanics working at Ferrari, "With the 
mechanics' observation that the race shop on Monday was more serene following a defeat than 
a victory. But why?"

Ferrari explained, "There is always something to learn. One never stops learning particularly 
when one isn't losing. When one loses, one knows what has to be done. When one wins, one is 
never sure." So I just want to tell you a little bit about these open-road races that they did and 
that caused a ton of death. This is just insane. There's a lot more detail on the book. I think this 
gives you a good overview.

"Open-road races have long been considered too dangerous by most civilized nations and had 
long since been banned. But the Mille Miglia" -- again most likely mispronouncing, "Only gained 
in popularity among the Italian people. Estimates of the crowd that turned out to line the route 
soared to as high as 10 million. Thousands of police and Army regulars labored in a futile attempt 
to keep the mobs off the course" -- oh, my goodness, "Keep the mobs off the course, but 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 20 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
ossu

, LLC.



drivers still had to be steeled to drive into packs of fans, moving, wobbling walls of flesh that 
would part like the Red Sea as they sped through."

So do you see what's happening there? Drivers going down the road. The fans are on the road, 
and as the cars approach, they like part and hopefully part in time. And then some of these crazy 
people do stuff like this, "Children skittered across the highway and often rode their bicycles on 
the shoulder. Strutting young men tried to show their mettle by attempting to touch the 
fenders of the speeding cars." Could you imagine being so close? Do you think it's safe to be 
close to a car that's going at 120, 130 miles an hour? So it's like, hey, guys, let me touch the 
fender.

I wonder if more -- I would guess that more spectators died than drivers. It's just crazy. So I 
mentioned this earlier, but he just -- and there is cons to it. But Enzo had like superhuman levels 
of stubbornness. So it says -- and some of this is just the fact that he succeeded by just 
showing up. "The source of much of Ferrari's success over the years was not technological 
brilliance," as I mentioned earlier, "Or tactical cleverness, but dogged, gritty, unfailing 
persistence in competing, a willingness to appear at the line no matter what the odds and run as 
hard as possible."

And like I said earlier, this is stubbornness to show up no matter what. Some of these races he 
wins by default because maybe they actually get their cars from Europe to Argentina or 
something like that. But the driver gets sick or there's an immigration issue or the car breaks 
down. And then Ferrari is there, not supposed to win the race or not expected to win the race. 
Guess what, I win by default.

Now my greatest competitors had some unknown catastrophic event that prevented them from 
performing or from being able to race. And guess what, I'm here. So I'm going to do it, and I'll 
get the win. And obviously, you get the prize money, you get the prestige, you get everything 
else. It's like this virtuous, like, flywheel effect.

The book also goes into detail about this whole Ford trying to buy Ferrari. Talked about that in 
Go Like Hell, talked about that in other places, mentioned it earlier in that clip. I just want to go 
to the end of it because that was funny, gives you an illustration of Enzo Ferrari the person, the 
fact that he's obsessed with control and he just was never going to yield that control.

"Ferrari opened the conversation with a question that addressed the entire philosophy of how 
the new operation would be run." By this point, Ford executives had toured the factory. They're 
negotiating for, I think, several weeks. I don't know if -- like I said earlier, if Ferrari ever had the 
intention of selling. He was so proud to be an Italian.

I think he just used it as leverage. What's -- the most likely -- like the thought process of -- or I 
guess, the description of Enzo's thought process around this time was most likely he was using 
this as bait for Fiat.

If -- he was going to sell the company, but he was going to sell to an Italian company. He was 
not going to sell it to the Americans. So after several weeks, he opens up this conversation and 
he says -- it gets the entire philosophy of how the new operation would be run. "If I wish to 
enter cars in Indianapolis and you do not wish me to enter cars in Indianapolis, do we go? Or do 
we not go?"

And the person from Ford leading the negotiation says, "'You do not go,' responded Frey 
without hesitation. Ferrari stiffened in his chair and said nothing for a moment. Then he stood up 
and gave Frey an icy glare. 'it was nice to know you.' Frey understood instantly that the 
negotiations were over. Under no circumstances would Ferrari release control of his racing 
operations to Ford or to anybody else for that matter."

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 21 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssus, LLC.



So Ferrari is notorious -- especially because so many of them were dying to -- never getting 
close to many of these drivers. There's a hilarious story in the book where this guy, one of these 
drivers wins a race. It was like the biggest race of the season, brought all kinds of attention and 
glory to Ferrari. And he said Ferrari never said anything to him about it. Weeks go by, and they 
just happened to pass each other in like the factory. And Ferrari just says two words. He says, 
"Hey, Champion." And the driver's like, "That's all he ever said to me about it ever."

Now the indication of that also is that Ferrari, like Gen. Groves -- a couple of weeks ago when I 
did that book The General and The Genius or The Genius and The General -- I don't know which 
one came first. Gen. Groves, the guy who was leading the Manhattan Project, would not give 
out compliments. They're like, "Why don't you compliment people when a job is well done?" He's 
like, "Because it could always be done better."

And I think Ferrari thought, it's like, "You won. That's what you're supposed to do. We're Ferrari." 
And for like a decade, right, up until they're overtaken by Ford, they -- I mean he dominates for a 
decade. Always he talks -- he's like, "This is expected."

But anyways, earlier I was saying, you can identify, you can learn about a person by saying -- like 
by studying who they don't like. You can also do that by who they admire. This is what Ferrari 
liked about one of his drivers.

"Ferrari seemed to genuinely like this moody but intensely competitive 30-year-old. Like himself, 
Surtees" -- I'm probably pronouncing that incorrectly, "Was self-made, a school dropout who 
had liked mechanics before rising" -- or excuse me, "Who learned mechanics before rising to 
stardom on motorcycles and then in automobiles."

So again, this is what he likes. He likes the fact that this guy is moody, intensely competitive, 
self-made, a dropout, one who learned mechanics before rising to stardom on motorcycles and 
then in automobiles. "Both men were utterly single-minded when it came to racing. And unlike 
many of the dilettantes who had driven for the team but had never gotten their hands dirty, 
Surtees was prepared to work endless hours, just like Ferrari, in the dyno rooms and engine 
shops of the factory, seeking more power and reliability. He was a racer to his core."

So I just want to bring again to your attention this monastic adherence to routine. One of -- this 
guy that he really liked, his name is Scaglietti. He was one of the designers that made cars like -- 
that's shaped like the Testarossa, the 250 GT Spyder, the California, all these other things. And 
so he was -- he really liked the fact that this guy was a craftsman, okay? But he had a 
commoner's sense of reality, which was how Ferrari thought as well.

So he says, "Each Saturday, Scaglietti would receive a phone call. 'Well, Scaglietti' -- it was from 
Ferrari. 'Well, Scaglietti, what are you doing now?' Would be the standard question. The reply 
was cast in stone: he had no plans. A lunch would then be arranged. It would seem impromptu, 
but in fact, this same schedule was maintained for over 20 years until Ferrari's health failed in 
the mid-1980s."

So it talks about, "They'd have this lunch every Saturday. Ferrari would lapse into recollections of 
his youth, repeating, hundreds of times, the story of his painful recovery in the Army hospital 
and the sound of the coffin nails being struck home on the floor below. The lunch would feature 
heavy Modenese fare, heavy cream sauces and would be amply lubricated with champagne.

This was classic Ferrari: habitual, regulated, predictable, and Modenese to the core. This was a 
simple man seeking simple pleasure. And he found it only within the confines of his own familiar 
territory."

I mentioned earlier the fact that Ferrari had a very different take on things. He's just like, "If 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 22 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lo

su
, LLC.



there's a race, I don't care what kind or where it's at. We're entering it." Now he can't do that. 
Towards the end of his career, he couldn't do that.

So it says, "Part of the problem was Ferrari's insistence on being everywhere at the same time. 
During the period -- during this period, he was competing in Formula One, Formula Two, the 
Tasman series, the Can-Am, major sports-car endurance races, and all the European hill-climb 
championships.

His engineers tried to convince Ferrari that the demands were too much. But this engineer's 
voice, it was a voice in the wilderness" -- meaning Ferrari just would not listen to them. I'm not 
entirely sure why. But when I got to this section, it reminded me of the engineer, the legendary 
engineer that I covered a few podcasts -- like 20 podcasts ago, Isambard Kingdom Brunel.

He had a really interesting philosophy because most people are like, "Okay, if something is not 
working out, let me try a different attempt." Isambard Kingdom Brunel's philosophy, his first 
thing he would do, first way like he would try to solve a problem was to increase the dosage, not 
change the technique or try a different attempt. It's like, "Oh, okay, this isn't working out. I need 
to do 10x as much."

And so that thought popped into my mind when I got to this section where this guy is like, "Oh, 
I'll do Formula One. I'll do Formula Two. I'll do these hill races. And I'll do endurance. I'll do short. 
I'll do long. It doesn't matter. I will just increase the dosage. I will do it all."

And so you and I have talked about this over and over again, the fact that Enzo really had 
nothing else that was important to him. So the idea like, he's not going to retire. A note I wrote 
myself on this page is a quote from David Ogilvy. And he said, "Retirement is fatal." "Those who 
knew him best understood that Enzo Ferrari would never retire. There was little else in his life 
besides automobile racing. It was that simple."

So even when he sells his company to Fiat, he still continues to work. He still has complete 
control of the racing aspect of the business. He lets them do the car production.

This is -- let me try and read my note. This is remarkable: selling the company to Fiat as an act of 
revenge. Oh, this is what I mentioned earlier. Okay. So it says, "While a tiny entity in the industrial 
world, his company was a giant in terms of prestige. An automobile" -- this is talking about 
Ferrari, the view of the brand, the power of the brand, right? Even though he's not producing -- I 
think he's producing 700 cars a year or something like that at this point, which is not a lot. I can't 
remember the exact number, but it's very small.

And so it says, "He's a giant in terms of prestige, an automotive boutique more comparable to 
Coco Chanel or Cartier or Gucci or Christian Dior than to the industrial monolith that was Fiat. 
For Ferrari, it was a simple solution to capitalize his sagging business because he" -- again 
prestigious business, but he spends all -- every money -- every dollar he makes, he puts it back 
into trying to make a better race car. So he's not like -- he winds up dying wealthy, but he's not 
-- he doesn't make a ton of money.

And the success -- like his son -- so one of his son dies, Dino. He's got like a bastard kid. And 
when his wife dies -- okay. So 'I'm not like -- I'm not going to sit here and talk to you about Enzo 
Ferrari's sex life, but the author mentions it like 50 times in the book. The guy was just obsessed 
with his -- during the day, he's obsessed with cars. At night, he's obsessed with sex. He's got like 
mistresses everywhere, all kinds of stuff. Even in his 80s, like he'll have dinners, and they go into 
detail in the book about like he talks about his sex life. It's really rather gross, honestly.

But he winds up having a son. That son to this day, still alive, is the only heir that he leaves, owns 
10% of Ferrari. And he's like a multiple billionaire -- multibillionaire, excuse me. So his son derived 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 23 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colos us, LLC.



most of the financial benefit from Ferrari than Enzo Ferrari did in his life. I think he dies with like 
a network of like $30 million, something -- so it's not like he was poor by any means. But just like 
Walt Disney, most of the wealth came after he died.

So it's saying, "For Ferrari, it was a simple solution to capitalize his sagging business. For the 
owner of Fiat, he was looking for status and respect. The deal was so attractive to Ferrari that he 
even traveled to Turin to sign the final papers, a city he had not visited in decades. It was also a 
measure of revenge for the old man."

It gives a hint of Ferrari's mindset. So he talks about like going and sitting on the bench, the 
same bench that he cried when he was 18 or 19 or however old he was. Now he comes back 50 
years later. He's like, "Okay, I closed this loop. I went back and closed this. I got my revenge."

The process that was set in motion was to wipe out the shame of 1918 when Ferrari was not 
welcomed by Fiat. Surely, Enzo Ferrari had long since forgotten that as a youth, he had been 
rejected for employment by Fiat some 50 years earlier. Surely, he hadn't nursed that bitterness 
for half a century and, now in his own convoluted way, considered the account settled. Or had 
he? He most certainly did.

Fiat received 40%, Enzo retained 49%, which would be ceded to Fiat upon his death. Piero 
Ferrari would get 10%. And to this day, Piero still owns 10%. I think he actually owns like 10 point 
-- I look it up, 10.3% or something like that. And so Enzo was also famous for never going to see 
his own races. And really, you could tell, he loved what he did because the stimulation was not in 
the result, but it was in the process. And I thought that, that was fascinating.

Let me read this to you. "For the most part, he watched the contest alone" -- the races that is. 
"Although, one associate was occasionally invited to sit in. He recalls that Ferrari never showed 
emotion no matter what the fortunes of his automobiles. Ferrari simply sat there, silent and 
inert, never responding to either victory or defeat.

His view of racing remained constant. The event itself was essentially meaningless. For him, the 
stimulation came in the planning and preparation, in the creation of the machines, in the 
organization of the human beings who would man the team. He was obsessed with the process. 
He was in love with the organization, the creation of the cars, not the outcome of the race.

Of course, he wants to win the race. But I think that's a really good sign that you're obsessed 
with the actual journey. That's an interesting idea I hope I remember. So like I said earlier, Enzo 
does this until he dies. There's a great story in the book that is pure Enzo. This is right before he 
dies. Chinetti goes and visits him. Enzo's mind is still sharp, but his body is betraying him. And 
they go and they wind up -- this is the last time they ever meet. And Chinetti says, "May I 
embrace you?" "In silence, Enzo Ferrari opened his arms, and the two men hugged, groping 
perhaps for the life that was slipping away from them.

There was a brief display of tears, quickly dabbed and then business began. They discussed an 
old Ferrari Formula Two car. Chinetti agreed to lend the automobile to the proposed Ferrari 
Museum. He was well aware of the feeding frenzy of Ferrari collectors around the world that had 
made the car in question worth more than $1 million."

So the car is worth $1 million. Chinetti is like, "No, you know what, I'll give it to you. I'll donate it 
to your Ferrari Museum, but you have to do the following." And so it says, "But for his old friend, 
he proposed a deal: $40,000 donated to four charities, including the poor children of Maranello. 
Ferrari balked. He would pay no more than $30,000, not a penny more. Chinetti could not help 
but be amused.

Here was this man, 90 years old, mortally wounded by the passage of time yet still able, yes, 

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 24 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colo
sus, LLC.



eager to haggle over a few dollars. 'The old rascal, worth at least $40 million,' Chinetti reckoned, 
'Intending to go to his reward with his last lira.' The deal, always the deal. It was classic Ferrari.

And that is where I'll leave it. If you want to buy the book, there's a link in the show notes. If you 
buy that book -- if you buy the book using the link, you'll be supporting the podcast at the same 
time. If you want to buy a gift subscription, there's also a link down below. That is 220 books 
down, 1,000 to go. And I'll talk to you again soon.

Founders - #220 Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine
Page 25 of 25. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.
