# Transcript 1

Ben: All right, David. What’s on your wrist?
David: Well, currently on the wrist is my stainless whiteface Daytona that my dad gave me. I think it was still quite popular when he gave it to me, probably close to 15 years ago, but not like it is today.
Ben: A strong choice. I’m actually also wearing a Daytona that I am borrowing from a good friend of the show.
David: Love it.
Ben: Well, fun fact for listeners. The watch that David is wearing is the one that I was wearing during the Morris Chang interview when we wanted to foreshadow that this was our next episode.
David: And in front of me here now in my hand but not on my wrist, is my other Rolex that my dad gave me a long time ago. My Rolesor Datejust.
Ben: Dude, you got to go one on each wrist.
David: Great.
Ben: All right.
Welcome to the Spring 2025 season of Acquired, the podcast about great companies and the stories and playbooks behind them. I’m Ben Gilbert.
David: I’m David Rosenthal.
Ben: And we are your hosts. All you need for timekeeping is something that happens at a constant rate and some way to count it. It could be sand in an hourglass, it could be a weight being pulled down by gravity on a grandfather clock, slowly turning the hands, moderated by the tick-tock of a pendulum. Or it could be a mechanical watch on your wrist, driven by a complex and beautiful array of hundreds of gears and springs. Today, listeners, we tell you the story that we can’t believe we haven’t already told on Acquired—Rolex.
Rolex is a cascade of paradoxes. It’s one of the best-known brands in the world. But despite that, it’s one of the least-known companies in the world. They’re privately held by a charitable foundation, the Hans Wilsdorf Foundation, so they don’t have to disclose anything, and really they never do. They’re one of the most secretive companies that we have ever studied. And David, check me on this, I think they’re even more secretive than IKEA or Mars.
David: Oh yeah. It’s funny that the closer to the present day we get, the less we know.
Ben: Totally. They operate like an intelligence agency over there.
David: Like James Bond, one might say.
Ben: Or one might not say. Listeners, they make watches that everyone wants to buy, but nobody seems to be able to get with famously long and opaque lists at retailers. Except, of course, over a million people a year actually do buy one for an average price of $13,000 each. That is until you walk out of the store, then they instantly become worth more, at least for a lot of the models these days.
David: To your point about paradoxes of Rolex, this is one of the greatest ones. It is absolutely one of the very, very top, top tier luxury brands in the world. And yet they also sell a lot of units. Hermès doesn’t sell a million Birkins every year.
Ben: There are probably 10 times more Rolexes sold than Birkins sold, or at least on that order. It’s a success built on the back of craftsmanship, engineering, and manufacturing, honed and perfected over 120 years. It’s one of the greatest brands in the world built meticulously and so intentionally, David.
My favorite part of the paradox, this is the story of the most successful Swiss watch company, but it wasn’t founded in Switzerland or even by Swiss person.
David: No, no, it was not.
Ben: It’s a $10-plus billion revenue business performing a dead craft obsoleted by the digital world. They make a watch that can’t tell the time as good as my Apple Watch, or even a $10 Casio for that matter. So what is going on here? How did Rolex become Rolex? This is a story we’ve been giddy to share.
David: Oh, so excited.
Ben: Well, one big disclaimer upfront. Much like how our NFL episode wasn’t about football and our NBA episode wasn’t about basketball. this episode isn’t really about watches. It’s about the business of watches.
If you want to know, every time an episode drops, check out our email list. It is the only place where we will share a hint of what our next episode will be, and we’ll share corrections, updates, and little tidbits that we learned from previous episodes. That’s acquired.fm/email or click the link in the show notes.
Join the Slack. Come talk to us about this episode with the whole Acquired community afterwards, acquired.fm/slack. And if you want more Acquired between monthly episodes, check out ACQ2, our interview show where we talk to founders, CEOs, and investors who are building businesses in areas that we’ve covered on the show.
The most recent one was a very fun interview we did with a friend of the show, Guillermo Rauch, the founder and CEO of Vercel, about really the whole history of web development frameworks, and their latest and greatest product v0, a startup within a startup that lets you code web apps from scratch in just English instead of a programming language. Search ACQ2 in any podcast player.
Ben: And listeners, this is not investment advice, but you can’t invest in this and you can’t invest in many of the other great brands that we are going to talk about on this episode either. There’s something remarkable about the companies we wish we could invest in, but actually we can’t. So this show is for informational and entertainment purposes only. David, where do we start our story?
David: All right. We start, as is so often the case with these big old European companies back not in the last century but even the century before that, on March 22nd in 1881 in Kulmbach, Bavaria, about 30 miles north of Nuremberg in present day Germany, where Hans Eberhard Wilhelm Wilsdorf is born to young Anna and Johan Wilsdorf.
Ben: And you might say this sounds like a German name. Bavaria wasn’t a part of Germany, right?
David: Well, I was just going to get to that. Technically it’s not Bavaria anymore. Technically, it is part of the German empire, but this is a very, very recent development.
The Count, Otto von Bismarck, had only just 10 years earlier, convinced Bavaria to join forces and unite with Prussia to form the greater German state/German empire in the aftermath of the Franco-Prussian War, where they battled Napoleon III over in France.
But as far as young Hans and his family are concerned, they’re Bavarian. They don’t identify with this Germany thing. This is foreign to them. They are also Protestant, not Catholic, which puts them in the great minority in Bavaria at the time.
Now, I say all of this deep European history here for two reasons. One because it’s a fun story and calls back to our Hermès and LVMH episodes, and it’s going to call back very directly to those episodes in a minute here.
Also I think it’s important to paint the picture of Hans is, even from birth, he’s this consummate outsider. He doesn’t really fit in in any national or religious identity in the either established or changing European order at the time. He doesn’t really have a country, he doesn’t really have a religion or a people. He floats between the seams of Europe, which Rolex itself is going to do, as we shall see in a very big way.
Now, back to young Hans and his family. His father, Johan, came from a line of successful ironmongers, and very likely Hans was destined to go into this business as well. However, when Hans is 12 years old, tragedy strikes and both his father and his mother die within a couple of months of each other. He’s orphaned, just like, this should sound familiar, Ben.
Ben: Oh yeah. Louis Vuitton and Hermès.
David: This is absolutely freaking nuts. The founders of arguably maybe the three biggest and most significant luxury brands in the world today, were all orphans from the 1800s. This is wild.
Ben: And I wonder how much of a statistical bias there is here. If we were studying anyone from this era, how many of them would be orphans because of disease and war and…
David: All sorts of stuff.
Ben: Just lots of people died for lots of reasons.
David: Totally true. But it’s just so interesting. These brands, much less so Rolex, but Hermès, LVMH are so steeped in European history and the tradition of the nobility, but it’s actually these orphaned outsiders that founded them.
Ben: I think it’s a great point. Rolex doesn’t share that heritage at all. This is not steeped in nobility. This is not an artifact like a leather bag or a saddle that any king has ever had.
David: When you buy a Submariner or a Daytona or even a Datejust, just you are not buying Swiss history here. You are buying 20th century modernity, as we will get into.
So in the wake of this tragedy, Hans and his brother and sister are placed in the care of his uncles. The uncles decide that they are going to sell the family ironmongering business to fund sending Hans and his siblings off to boarding school.
Hans would later write in this amazing document that is essentially his autobiography. It’s the first volume of a four book set that the company published in 1945 for the company’s 40th anniversary, the ruby jubilee. Hans writes, “Our uncles were not indifferent to our fate. Nevertheless, the way in which they made me become self-reliant very early in life made me acquire the habit of looking after my possessions, and looking back, I believe that it is to this, that much of my success is due.”
Hans goes off to boarding school and becomes an excellent student there. He excels in math. He also excels in foreign languages, particularly English. While he’s there in boarding school in Bavaria, he meets a friend who is from Switzerland.
He develops an interest in that country. He no longer really has any family ties or anything to Bavaria anymore. Doesn’t really care about Germany. He’s like, oh, great. Switzerland seems like a good place. I’m going to go live there when I graduate, which he does.
He moves to Geneva and he finds work there first for a large pearl merchant. This business was buying raw pearls from fishermen, and then selling them to the famous Swiss jewelers there in Geneva.
Then he joins another local trading company in an adjacent industry to the jewelry business, a firm called Cuno Korten. Cuno Korten turns out isn’t in just any industry as far as Switzerland goes. They’re in the industry besides banking. They’re in the watch trade.
Ben: Well, you need something to bank.
David: You need something to bank, exactly.
Ben: A country can’t just have banking as an industry. It needs a real economy to build banking on top of.
David: Exactly. You start with jewelry, watches, then you get into banking. Cuno Korten is actually a major player in the watch trade. Now, they’re not watch makers, they’re watch exporters. They are facilitating the trade of all these best-in-the-world Swiss watches out of Switzerland and into other countries around the world.
At this time—this is the late 1890s—Cuno is doing about a million Swiss Francs worth of business a year. Now, I don’t know exactly what the Swiss Franc to US Dollar exchange rate was at 1900, but today the Swiss Franc is stronger than the dollar. It’s about 1:1.
Ben: They’re pretty close.
David: So call it a million dollars of business a year in the 1890s. This is big. They’re a big player.
Ben: And it’s important to remember, too, it’s not like watches were this little corner of the Swiss economy. Exporting watches was a huge part of the Swiss economy and a huge employer in the nation.
David: Now, we’re saying watches here. It’s important to note what were watches at the time. They weren’t something you wear on your wrist. It was not wristwatches because basically Hans and Rolex hadn’t invented that yet. They didn’t exactly invent it, but hadn’t popularized it yet. We’re talking about pocket watches. That’s what the industry was at this time.
Ben: And part of the reason is functional. Pocket watches were bigger. The movement to accomplish a certain amount of precision didn’t require as little teeny tiny of tools. You had more margin of safety in bigger watches. Whenever anyone tried to make a watch and put it on the wrist, at this point in history, it was usually fragile or really inaccurate or actually worn more as jewelry. They actually didn’t call them wristwatches. They called them wristlets, and they were mostly worn by women.
David: Wristlets, yes. We’ll get more into that later. I know you’re chomping at the bit to give the technical explanation of the crazy human craft and engineering that goes into watches.
Ben: It’s amazing. It’s so unbelievably cool.
David: But back to the Han story for the moment. The job that young Hans gets here at Cuno turns out to be pretty pivotal for him and the future of Rolex. He is a secretary, which means that he’s answering letters from clients all around the world, and then responding and coordinating with them. Remember, he’s really good at languages, and what is his best language? English. So he’s coordinating with most of their clients in the British market in the UK.
Ben: And he sits at this really interesting choke point of the whole industry, where he understands how all the producers are laid out and how the whole value chain works on the Swiss side of things.
David: He’s seeing the market prices and price action happen for all different types of watches from different makers in different parts, et cetera, but he’s also getting to know the buyers in Britain who are not individual people. These are retailers, these are the jewelers in Britain. These are the distribution points for watches.
He’s getting the perfect business market, strategic background distribution relationships for going on to ultimately found Rolex. But it’s not just that he falls in love with the business of watches there. He also falls in love with the objects and watches themselves and their performance.
He starts this habit of he would take home batches of pocket watches at night and he would run his own tests for accuracy on them on the product that Cuno Korten was trading in. He would set them all at the same time, let them go overnight, and then he would check them in the morning how much they were disparate from one another and check their accuracy.
The legend goes that one day he gets the idea that he’s going to take three watches that he’s found to be quite accurate in this whatever this recent batch that he’s testing is, he’s going to go get them tested at the local astronomical observatory, and have them measured these watches according to the strict observatory timekeeping tests, which are also called chronometer tests.
If you’ve ever heard the term chronometer, a chronometer is a timekeeping piece—could be a watch, could be a larger clock, could be all sorts of devices—that has passed these astronomical observatory tests for being accurate enough for celestial navigation.
Ben: David, I’m looking down at this Daytona right now, and it says Rolex Oyster Perpetual, which all three of those words we haven’t gotten to yet. Superlative chronometer, officially certified cosmograph. A lot of words in there that we will get to, but at the moment where we are is chronometer, officially certified.
David: Yes. Today this is like, oh cool. That’s cute. Your mechanical watch is officially certified that it keeps good time. Back then, this is critically important. Celestial navigation, if you’re involved in anything in shipping, the maritime trade, is critical. If you have a crappy timepiece…
Ben: You’re going to go to the wrong place because you’re using it for navigation. To your point, observatory chronometer certification, no one’s doing it for my pocket watch that I can set to the local church bell or whatever whenever I need to reset it.
David: But young Hans has this idea, he goes and does a, guess what? These three pieces that he takes, these pocket watches pass the test, and they get certified as chronometers. He takes them back to his bosses at Cuno and they’re like, whoa. Well let’s got to market. Slap that on the tin baby.
It’s this aha moment of Cuno and then soon the rest of the industry realizes, oh, actually chronometer certification on pocket watches helps us move product here.
Ben: The other thing to realize here is we are in an era where this era would last the next 100+ years. But an era where having a watch is super important. It’s not a fashion accessory. It’s not a nice-to-have. Without a pocket watch, if you are leaving your house and moving about in the world, you’re lost. It’s almost like not having your phone today where you feel like I’m floating. It’s very uncomfortable.
David: Totally. It’s even more than you’re saying. It’s like a smartphone in that you need it to function, but pocket watches are also like smartphones today and that they’re fidget devices. If you’re out in the world and you’re waiting in line or you don’t know what to do with your hands, you’re in a socially awkward situation, whatever, you’re take your pocket watch out, you’re going to open the clasp. This is what people did. It was just so ingrained in everyone’s day-to-day existence just like a smartphone is today.
Ben: It’s an essential tool for moving about the world, which explains how it’s such a huge industry that moves the needle for the nation of Switzerland, how there are these businesses that can be exporting a million dollars worth over 100 years ago, and why there’s so much attention being paid to it. It’s not a random accessory. It is an essential piece of life, a tool.
David: Totally. So after working at Cuno for a couple of years and liaising with the British market, in 1903 Hans decides that, hey, I’m good at English, I like London. I might actually want to move there. He moves to London at age 22, and he goes to work for another watch company there in London locally. We actually don’t know the name. I don’t think anybody has ever found the name.
Ben: What you and I read probably five books between us and wasn’t any of them.
David: Yeah. He works there for two years and he writes, “Two things struck me most forcibly about my new employers,” this British watch company. “On the one hand their commercial competence, and on the other hand their lack of specialization. I soon gained confidence in myself, and in 1905 at the age of 24, decided to set up in business alone feeling that my training and education had prepared me.”
He strikes out on his own, starts his own watch importing company there in London. But remember the specialization piece that’ll come back in a sec. Hans is out on his own. There’s one problem, though. In order to do what he wants to do, which is import Swiss watches and sell them directly under his own banner where he makes and keeps the profits there in London, he needs some capital in order to finance the buying.
Ben: Got to place the order.
David: Yes. So through his lawyer, he gets connected with a local man in London named Alfred James Davis, who has some money to invest. They meet through the lawyer, they hit it off immediately, and decide to go into business together. Thus in 1905, Wilsdorf and Davis Limited, the world-famous merchant watch trading firm is born. And yes, none of you know Wilsdorf and David. However, Wilsdorf and Davis Limited is Rolex as we shall see.
Now, it’s often said that if you read anything about the history, people will tell you, oh, well Davis was Hans’s brother-in-law. He married Hans’s younger sister Ana. That is true. But I believe that didn’t actually happen until after Hans and Alfred went into business together. I think Ana met Davis through Hans.
Ben: But really it is Wilsdorf’s company. It’s funny that Davis’s name is on it. I get the sense he’s mostly capital. Yeah, he is there a little bit, but it’s almost as if Atari instead of being Atari is Bushnell and Valentine. That’s the equivalent here.
David: I think that’s right. Obviously they get closer over time as they become family when Davis marries Hans’s sister. But yeah, I think this is Hans’s business. He’s running it. Davis trusts him.
Ben: So what is the business doing?
David: Well the business plan when they get going is they’re going to do what Hans has been doing his whole career at this point in time, which is importing Swiss-made, highest quality in the world watches into the London market where there is high demand for them.
Ben: And they’re not selling directly to consumers, right?
David: No. Just like back at Cuno Korten, the buyers are, the retailers are the jewelers. No end consumer had any idea who made their watch at this point in time. They would walk into the retailer, say, give me a fine Swiss watch, sir, and the retailer would sell it to them.
Ben: And the retailer would take one out from the case. You look down at the face of the watch, the face of the watch has the retailer’s name on it, and you’re just trusting that the retailer bought a good watch from some importer, who bought a good watch from someone on the Swiss side, who managed to create a good watch by putting a movement, a case, and all that together.
Now, there’s a little bit of detail in there where sometimes the importer would import a fully-built watch. Sometimes, the importer would just import a movement, then they would import a case differently, and then they would put together themselves. But this was the craziest thing that struck me, is the retailer is the brand on the watch at this point in time.
David: There is no brand for the product.
Ben: Wilsdorf and Davis is occupying the spot in the value chain, where they are importing the watches, and then selling them to retailers to brand.
David: Now you said there a minute ago something really important, which is there were two ways that this would happen. You would either import fully-finished watches from Switzerland, a whole product so to speak, and either trading firm like Wilsdorf and Davis would do this, or Cuno Korten would export it, or maybe the retailers would buy directly from Cuno Korten, et cetera.
Ben: If they were big enough.
David: If they were big enough, yup. What Wilsdorf and Davis are doing is they’re saying, well, Hans knows through his time at Cuno Korten all the best movement makers, all the best case makers.
Ben: He operated one click up the value chain, aggregating on the Swiss side.
David: Exactly.
Ben: So now that he’s operating down on the importer level one click down the value chain, he’s like, I can still aggregate all these producers and start building a watch myself.
David: He’s not making anything, but he is assembling the finished product. He would have watchmakers there in Britain assemble the best movements that he would import from Switzerland with the best cases that he would find, and that was part of his value that he’s adding to the industry here.
Ben: And this is probably an important time. There is so much lingo in the watch industry, and we’re going to do our very best on this episode to demystify it. Movement, in layspeak, is the whole inside that makes the watch tick and drives the hands.
David: Not the dial, right?
Ben: Correct. No dial, no hands, no case, no glass front.
David: And the movement, I think like you said, is the critical piece.
Ben: Absolutely. That’s the hard thing.
David: Case is important, dial’s important, hands are important, but that’s all aesthetics. As far as performance goes, 100% movement. It’s like semiconductor production. If you’re a movement maker, you’re like TSMC here.
Ben: Chronometer officially certified refers to the movement. Actually, in fact, only the movements are tested not the whole final case watch.
David: Not the finished watches, yes.
Ben: So David, who is he importing movements from, and how does he meet said movement maker?
David: Well, that brings us to the other half of the Rolex equation. One Jean Aegler based in Bienne, Switzerland, which is in the mountains of the north of the country.
Ben: Importantly not Geneva.
David: Yeah, not Geneva. Geneva’s in the southwest of the country in Switzerland right next to France. Aegler runs this movement workshop up in what is then a tiny little town in the Swiss mountains. It turns out that he’s actually like a generational talent at watch movement making. In particular, what he’s really, really, really good at is making movements that are accurate and on par with the highest quality, most precise, most accurate movements out there on the market, but are also much smaller in size. He’s making miniature movements.
Hans had gotten to know Jean when he was working at Cuno Korten, and thought like, oh hey man, this guy’s a diamond in the rough up there in the mountains. He’s as good or better as any movement maker.
Ben: And he’s making these miniature movements before there’s a real market. It’s almost like he’s just doing it because it’s the hardest thing he can think of.
David: Totally. It’s like his hobby horse. I’m going to push the limits of human achievement of how small I can make this thing. I think he’s probably known and respected in the industry, but wasn’t a large player. Hans is like, oh, actually this guy is my ticket to differentiation here.
Ben: I’m keeping his address so I can write him a letter when I get to…
David: I start my own company.
Ben: Yeah.
David: So here we are at the beginning of Wilsdorf and Davis. Hans is importing these movements from Aegler, that he’s putting into cases, selling his watches here in the UK. This is 1905. This carries through, this relationship, for the next 99 years, until Rolex finally buys Aegler in 2004, where Aegler is making the movements for Rolex watches. I don’t think there’s ever any real formal arrangement here. It’s basically a handshake deal.
Ben: That’s correct. We will make your movements. Handshake deal for 99 years.
David: All of Rolex, everything it becomes, this is the basis of it.
Ben: So they weren’t exclusive yet. In 1905, they’re placing their first order and there’s already a little bit of a dance that’s starting to happen, where of course the front of the watch on the dial is unsigned, so the retailer can put their name there. This already is starting to rub Hans the wrong way. He feels like these are my watches. Why is the retailer get to put their name on it?
So he goes to Aegler and says, the ones we’re going to sell, these are Wilsdorf and Davis watches. I understand you made the movement, but we got to brand it somewhere. He gets Aegler to buy in on this idea that on the movement they’re going to put a W and D. Then also inside the case back for whoever they’re buying the case from, they also inscribe W and D.
That’s the state of things here in 1905 and those first few years after, is there’s a W and D on the inside case back on the movement, but not on the face of the watch.
David: Which gets into the type of watches that they’re making here. Now, we’re still in pocketwatch land. The wristwatch vision hasn’t really entered Hans’s brain yet, even though Aegler’s specialty is these small miniature movements.
Remember what Hans said about his earlier British employers and their lack of specialization. He continues in his autobiography talking about how he decided to do things differently here at Wilsdorf and Davis. “I undertook the financial side and management of our concern. From the very outset, our success was assured by our fundamental policy to trade only in specialty horological products and especially in new lines.
The first specialty we adopted was the traveling watch called a portfolio watch cased in the finest quality leathers. This line I immediately placed in large quantities on the market, the range covering every possible style and design.”
Again, we’re not at wristwatch yet, but he’s like, the way that I’m going to succeed and break through here is through differentiation.
Ben: Yes, to do something different. It’s like we always talk about. The most important thing to build a huge, successful business is to do something different and unique that people have to come to you for and can’t go to the commodity markets. Now that doesn’t necessarily mean you’re right.
David: Yeah, because he is not right with traveling watches.
Ben: We don’t tell any of the stories here on Acquired of all the people who wanted to do something extremely unique and different and was not what the market wanted. But it’s the classic, you have to be contrarian and right.
David: Yeah. I don’t know. I guess reading what Hans wrote there, maybe he was right. It sounds like the traveling watch was a success enough. He probably thought it was a success at the time.
Then as legend has it, one day, shortly after starting the company and focusing on these travel watches, Hans is reading an account of the Second Boer War in South Africa. Ben, I never knew that all of my AP European history lessons are going to…
Ben: I tweeted this yesterday.
David: I know. Who knew that our livelihoods would depend on AP European history someday.
Ben: That’s right.
David: Anyway, Hans is reading an account of the Second Boer War in South Africa. He reads that the soldiers that had fought had worn wristwatches so that they could coordinate their movements and their firing times, and all the troop movements even while they were holding guns.
Ben: Do you know why in particular this war had them wearing wristwatches?
David: Oh, I don’t. I just assumed that the technology had progressed enough. Because wristwatches existed at this point in time. They just weren’t thought of as serious watches.
Ben: That was part of it. Climate.
David: Oh yes, of course.
Ben: They can’t wear their jackets, and so they can’t reach into their pocket and grab a pocket watch.
David: Of course, because it’s hot there.
Ben: Yup.
David: Well, climate is going to become important again here in the development of the wristwatch industry. The soldiers and officers there would use these wristwatches because even though they weren’t as accurate as pocket watches, like you said, Ben, you probably weren’t wearing a jacket. Even if you were wearing a jacket, like if you’re engaged in battle, you are going to stop, put your gun down, take your pocket watch out of your vest, open the case. No.
Ben: The axis upon which you evaluate value is a different axis than when you’re hanging out on the streets of London.
David: Yes. Supposedly, as Hans is reading this, like a bolt of lightning, he has the key insight. Well, hell, it’s not just soldiers these days. It’s actually a lot of people in the world that could benefit from having an accurate timepiece on their wrist, that they could just turn their wrist, look down, and look at instead of a pocket watch.
Ben: Now, the funny thing is he calls Aegler, maybe he writes to Aegler, I don’t exactly know.
David: He sends him a text.
Ben: He places the largest order in Aeglers company history, several hundred thousand Swiss francs for a bunch of these tiny movements. The great irony, this whole thing is he’s kind of wrong. The time was not right for wristwatches yet. The Boer War was not the shove that the world needed to say, whoa, wristwatches. The soldiers come back from the Boer War, and it’s still the wristlets era. There’s not really enough inertia to make it take off everywhere.
Now it’s okay, because Wilsdorf and Davis is still this small company. They don’t need that big of a market to address, to feed the needs of the business. But it would be another 10 years before World War I happened, and you had this incredible unfortunate tailwind saying, oh my God, we need tons of wristwatches now.
David: There does start to be a market for serious timekeeping, wristwatches, particularly in the far reaches of the empire, so Australia, South Africa, of course after the Boer War, and especially India. These are places where you’re probably not wearing a jacket or a vest that much. This is the initial seeds of the wristwatch market for Wilsdorf and Davis.
Ben: So interesting.
David: But Hans is a true believer at this point in time. He thinks this is going to be the future way beyond just the empire. People in Britain are going to want this too. It’s obvious to him why you wouldn’t want to have to reach into your vest to bring out your pocket watch.
Ben: He’s like a zealot.
David: He’s a total zealot. He is like, all right, we’ve got this killer product. We’re first to market. We’re basically going to invent this whole market. We need a name for the product. We need something that’s going to make consumers know to ask for this product, for our watches. We need to coin the term for the industry.
He’s inspired here by the Kodak camera, which by then had been around for a while and was made not by the Kodak company, but by the Eastman company. Kodak, I believe, was the first invented product brand name, and it was a name that meant nothing.
Ben: I think that’s right, and it intentionally meant nothing. It was easy to pronounce, it was easy to say. You could see it once. It was very memorable.
David: It worked in any language. It was five letters. It had a great sound to it. Supposedly Eastman came up with the name Kodak, with his mother using an anagram set. He said that there were three principle concepts that he was looking for in the name. One, it should be short, easy to pronounce, it should work in any language, and it should not resemble any other name or be associated with anything else.
Anyway, Hans takes inspiration from this, and he decides that he needs a Kodak for his new wristwatch. He writes, “I tried combining the letters of the alphabet in every possible way. This gave some a hundred names, but none of them felt quite right. It was one morning when I was sitting on the upper level of a double decker bus,” powered at that time by horses, “driving alongside Cheapside in London, that a good genie whispered in my ear, Rolex.” He’s good at mythmaking.
Ben: Many startups are named this way today.
David: Totally. A few days after this fruitful journey, the Rolex brand was filed and then officially registered in Switzerland by Wilsdorf and Davis. Now, this is a brand name. This is not yet the company name. It’s Rolex by Wilsdorf and Davis. They trademarked it in Switzerland. A couple of years later, they trademarked it in London.
Ben: It’s short, it’s easily pronounceable, it’s memorable. It’s the same in every language. But there is this one other characteristic that makes it really perfect, which is when you hear Rolex, you can think about rolling a crown of a watch. That little knob that’s sticking out from it that you use to wind the clock. It channels that.
There’s also the X, has a timekeeping feel to it also. It almost is like the tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick. A Rolex feels like maybe you’re turning the crown until it hits the end or something like that. You can intuit the type of product that would be called Rolex.
David: Totally. Hans is like, okay, great. I’ve got my Kodak name, I’ve got the brand, invent this new category. How am I going to legitimize this with customers?
Ben: Well, I have this one cool trick that I used before.
David: Exactly. I had the one cool trick. I’m going to do the one cool trick just with wristwatches instead of pocket watches. In 1910, he sends the first wristwatch movement to the School of Horology in Switzerland to be awarded the world’s first wristwatch chronometer rating.
Ben: Which is a big deal because people just did not think these things were accurate before. And without Aegler, they weren’t.
David: Exactly. Now getting certified at the School of Horology in Switzerland is nice and all, but this isn’t an astronomical observatory. This doesn’t carry the same weight as something like (say) the Royal Observatory there in England. So Hans and Aegler keep working on these products, refining the movements. Aegler’s getting better and better at making wristwatch movements that are truly great.
Ben: 1910 goes by. 1911 goes by. We’re here in 1912. Wilsdorf asked Aegler specifically, hey, can you produce a wristwatch capable of achieving an observatory timekeeping certificate? And David, as you mentioned, the royal observatory and Aegler says, let me try and let me get to work. It still takes a couple of more years.
David: So he works for two years. Then finally in early summer, 1914, Hans takes one of Geller’s movements to the Kew Royal Observatory in England for testing. Now, Kew is not only a well-respected observatory for astronomical and specifically timepiece testing there in England. It’s where all the marine chronometers for the British Royal Navy are tested. The British Royal Navy, at this point in time, we’re talking the British Empire, the greatest Navy in the world.
Ben: And it takes 45 days. They put it through the ringer to make sure that this marine chronometer is going to get our soldiers, our sailors, where they need to go.
David: And even more than that, it is of course affiliated with the other great observatory in England, the Greenwich Royal Observatory, which was where Greenwich Mean Time was invented. We were talking probably the most important timekeeping institution in the world.
Ben: Have you been there, David? To Greenwich?
David: No. I want to go have you.
Ben: There’s an awesome museum with the history of timekeeping. When I spent some time in London of summer 15 years ago, I went and spent a day there. It was amazing.
David: Oh, we got to go.
Ben: Yeah.
David: We’ll stop by on our way to Geneva.
Ben: Perfect.
David: Again, here we are. It’s early summer 1914. Hans has submitted this wristwatch movement to Kew. After the 45-day rigorous battery of testing, on July 15th, 1914, it comes back, it passed, and it receives the First Class A Precision certificate known as the Kew-A certification ever awarded to a wristwatch. Caused for great, great celebration and fanfare all around the world, except that it is three weeks after World War I starts.
So between the time that Hans had brought the watch in for testing and when it finally gets the certification, Archduke Franz Ferdinand is assassinated in Bosnia by a Serbian nationalist. The whole rat’s nest of European alliances gets triggered, and next thing you know, the whole world is at war.
Ben: On the one hand, nobody cares about watches. There’s a war breaking out. On the other hand…
David: Everybody cares about watches, exactly. World War I is truly the first crucible moment for Rolex because it’s the best thing that ever happened to the company in the industry. It made the whole world care about wristwatches.
Also, it’s very directly the worst thing because all of a sudden anti-German sentiment in Britain goes through the roof. Totally insane. There are all sorts of horrible propaganda. I didn’t realize this until now. Do you know why British people call German Shepherds, Alsatians?
Ben: Yeah, because they don’t want to call them German.
David: It’s because of this. There are all sorts of racism against Germans in England and in Britain, which is utterly ridiculous because the British royal family was German.
Queen Victoria married Prince Albert. Prince Albert was a German prince. The whole British royal family was German. This is when they changed their name to Windsor, because before Windsor, their family name was Saxe-Coburg-Gotha.
Ben: Which isn’t going to play well when you’re at war against the Germans.
David: No, no, no, no, no, no.
Ben: Speaking of things that aren’t going to play well when you’re at war against the Germans, you’re not building a strong consumer brand in Britain in 1914 called Wilsdorf.
David: If the British Royal family is rebranding…
Ben: Changing their name, yeah.
David: Wilsdorf and Davis also needs to rebrand, despite the fact that at this point, Wilsdorf is a naturalized British citizen.
Ben: And feels no affiliation to Germany. He really doesn’t ever in his life consider himself German.
David: Totally. But this is the birth of the company Rolex. In 1915, they renamed the whole company after the brand name Rolex, and the Rolex Watch Company Limited is founded.
Ben: Well, David, I was about to ask you, how does this become a Swiss watch company? And the answer is definitely right around this time in World War I.
Ben: All right, David. How are we getting to Switzerland?
David: How does Rolex become a Swiss watchmaking company? Well, obviously the anti-German sentiment was part of it. I think if that were the only factor, Rolex probably would’ve stayed in England.
Ben: At this point, Wilsdorf is a naturalized citizen.
David: His wife is British.
Ben: The company is called Rolex now, or they’re working on it. It would’ve been fine.
David: However, the other reason that World War II in Britain is bad for business for the new Rolex company is that Britain imposes a 33% import tax on watches early on in the war. That’s going to kill your importing business.
Ben: It’s interesting. I read that and yeah, it’s going to make it tougher. It’s crippling, but still you could run a business. You could figure out how to pass those prices along to customers. That’s often what happens in the case of tariffs.
But one year later, at the beginning of 1916, the British government puts the nail in the coffin. They completely banned the import of all gold and silver. They made it impossible for Wilsdorf to build this business based out of Britain.
A lot of times he’s actually exporting the watches for sale in colonies, or he’s importing a movement. He’s importing a case, or maybe he’s taking a local British case, putting it together, making a Rolex watch, and that it’s getting shipped out somewhere else. He’s sitting there thinking, I can’t get these precious metals and I’m paying out the nose for these movements. This is stupid to run my business here.
David: I assume then as now, Rolex’s margins in the precious metal watches are way, way, way higher than in non-precious metal watches.
Ben: It’s insane. A $10,000 watch becomes a $30,000 watch when…
David: You add gold to it, or platinum, or whatever, yup. The delta between…
Ben: It’s like Apple selling memory.
David: Exactly.
Ben: Interestingly, in the hype of 2020–2022, the precious metals were actually easier to come by as a customer because there was so much less demand to go buy a $30,000, $50,000, $100,000 watch, that those would be lying around while the steel ones were flying off the shelves and there were huge lines for them.
David: Totally. On the back of this, in 1916, Rolex first moves the assembly of the watches to Bienne in the Swiss mountainside near where Aegler is.
Ben: Which makes sense. They set up an office and basically say, hey, you’re making the movements next door. We’re going to put a case on them right here.
David: And then be able to export from Switzerland now to countries all over the world and not go through Britain first. Ultimately, after the war in 1919, Hans moves both himself and the official company headquarters to Geneva, where of course it still is to this day. And even to this day—this is crazy—design, sales, marketing, and (I think) final assembly all happen in Geneva while production of the movement still happens up in the mountains in Bienne.
Ben: It’s super interesting. It would make sense if you are Britain to throw on some tariffs to finance your war; you got to finance it somehow. At the same time, it also makes sense if you’re a business operating in Britain in this time to say, and I’m moving to Switzerland.
But there’s this alternative reason to move the business to Switzerland, and Hans knows it. If he’s going to build a globally-renowned watch company, he wants to do it in Switzerland. This company becomes Rolex of Geneva, not just Rolex.
Again, I’m going to look at this watch all the way down at the bottom. Swiss made. Don’t you forget it. Or you look at a Patek Philippe. Geneve right there on the face of every Patek Philippe watch. They are extremely proud of this.
David: Geneve. I love it. Genève, Ben. Genève.
Ben: Oh, I’m going to hear about that one, aren’t I?
David: It’s okay. We’re ugly Americans here.
Ben: Okay. Then the question is, why does Geneva have this prestige? Why is Switzerland an amazing place for watchmaking? Well, David, will you indulge me and let me wind the clock back? I actually thought you were going to start the timeline for this episode back in the 1500s. I was shocked that you only started it in the 1800s. Perhaps this is a good time to go and tell the history of watchmaking in Switzerland story.
David: By all means.
Ben: Okay, great. A lot of this comes from Marc Bridge, who is the founder and CEO of At Present, a marketplace for unique jewelry from independent artists. Marc is one of David and my very best friends, and insanely coincidentally and lucky for us, you listeners, he wrote his master’s thesis 20 years ago on the Renaissance of the Swiss watch industry.
David: Amazing.
Ben: He sent me a copy of it. We’re going to link to it in the show notes. It’s awesome to have this resource available just very conveniently from one of our best friends.
All the way back in the 1500s, Geneva was a center of activity for the Protestant Christian world led by John Calvin. If you know anything about Calvinism, it is very focused on moral uprightness.
David: The Protestant work ethic.
Ben: One of these tenets was banning frivolous things like ornamental jewelry. Local goldsmiths and jewelers instead focused on watchmaking, since watches served a real function in the world and were not frivolous. It was this exception to the rule if you had that skillset.
David: There’s also, human beings are human beings no matter what rules you impose on them. It’s like life finds a way, Status always finds a way.
Ben: That’s 100% right. So you’ve got the rise of Calvinism. Along with that religious reason that’s causing this local pivot of industries, you have one of climate too. There are these long, harsh winters. An industry that could be done indoors in a small physical footprint was perfect.
If you’re going to go pick a profession out of a hat to have in Switzerland, mountainous country, long, cold winter, this is a great one. Especially because it’s so valuable at this point in time, you can become an important player in the European economy, making something that you can make in your climate.
Third, there’s a cultural reason. David, are you familiar with the term établissage?
David: Ooh, no.
Ben: Are you sure?
David: It’s supposed to be Swiss, not French.
Ben: I was going to say.
David: I’ve been to Geneva and I’ve been to other places in Switzerland, but I know very little about its culture and history. Talk to me about terroir. I know exactly what you’re talking about, but établissage, I don’t know.
Ben: Okay. Well it’s Swiss for establishment, basically. But what établissage means in this context is that it’s this economic system that they established in the area of the Jura Mountains, where very small independent companies, often 1–10 people, could focus on something small, like a single component, and then you’d have dozens of these small companies work together to create the finished product. It’s almost like a distributed manufacturing system.
David: Ah, so this is where Aegler comes from. This is why he is got the workshop in the mountains
Ben: Établissage, yup, exactly. With this specialization of labor in small companies, you could get really, really good at your tiny part, making (say) hair springs that we’ll talk about later, or these essential elements of watch movements. These tiny companies by artisanal craftsmen, these very labor-intensive companies got really, really, really good and pretty efficient at making their one thing. That’s the backdrop of how the Swiss are producing things.
Lastly, in the late 1500s, the French had been rising as a watchmaking powerhouse. When the balance of power changed in France and the Catholics came to power, the French Huguenot refugees who had talents in jewelry, metalwork, and watchmaking, fled to Geneva.
David: These are the Protestants that got kicked out of France.
Ben: That’s exactly right. The Protestant safe haven of Geneva, they brought their watchmaking expertise. Or if they didn’t have watchmaking expertise, that’s all they could really do if they were jewelers or metal workers since you can’t make anything too shiny and too off-putting.
David: This is how Switzerland gets the reputation as the watchmaking capital of the world.
Ben: Exactly. Basically, this creates centuries of momentum, especially in this distributed établissage system of how Swiss watches were made. I think about it as this beautiful blend of French beauty and appreciation for aesthetic and Swiss precision.
David: Well, it sounds like Switzerland itself. It’s a blend of French beauty and German precision. I love it. That’s definitely one big reason why Hans is like, okay, we got to move Rolex to Geneva to participate in this tradition as we’re now going to be selling to the world.
But the other reason is after World War I, they’re like, well, we’re going to be selling to the world now. Britain is still going to be our largest market likely, but every country in the world is fighting, or at least every European country has troops fighting in World War I. They’re all seeing the benefits of the wristwatch. This is going to be way, way, way bigger after World War I. I need to be able to serve the whole world.
Ben: So they want to be in a neutral country.
David: Yeah. He just experienced like, oh, Britain puts these tariffs on, and gosh, well I didn’t really have a market for Rolexes in Germany before, but if I did I wouldn’t have been able to sell in Germany. I don’t want that to happen in the future.
Ben: Who’s not going to put on a big tariff to finance a war? Switzerland.
David: Switzerland, yeah.
Ben: Super interesting. You know what else happens in 1919? Well, now that we’ve set up shop next to Aegler for putting their movements in our cases, it’s time for us to get a little bit closer.
Rolex and Aegler arranged for a deal where in 1919–1920, Hermann Aegler, who’s the son of the founder Jean, buys shares in Rolex—unclear what the purchase price was; that seems to have been lost to history—and joins the board. He owns about 15%. The board is Wilsdorf, Davis, and Aegler.
There’s a second part of the deal, which is Rolex actually buys shares in Aegler too. This one’s less talked about, but there were two companies that were big purchasers of the movements. It’s Rolex and Gruen, and both of them were watchmakers. Gruen (I think) was American. It was their second biggest client. Both of them bought Aegler shares also.
David: Because Rolex did not focus on the American market until after World War II.
Ben: Correct. The companies are a little bit more joined at the hip, but still not an exclusive partnership.
David: And like we said before, I believe still, even though there’s this equity relationship, there’s no formal contract governing the provision of movements here.
Ben: Crazy. But it’s in both their best interest to keep it going.
David: Of course. Here we are now. World War I is over. We’ve had the ChatGPT moment (shall we say) for wristwatches. All these soldiers from countries all over Europe in the world experience the power of having an accurate watch on your wrist. They go home to their civilian lives. They want to bring it into their life. Who makes the best and most accurate wristwatch, chronometer, timekeeping pieces in the world? Rolex. Of course, they’re going to buy Rolex.
Ben: No, that’s not true.
David: No. That is not what they’re going to do.
Ben: It’s Omega, right?
David: Well, I think it’s lots of companies. Basically, the market went from the very early adopters in the British dominions—far-flung reaches of the British Empire before—to now all of a sudden it’s this giant European wide market. most of which, they have no idea about Rolex.
They’re like, Rolex? Whatever. I don’t know what Rolex is. I’ve never heard of such a thing before. I think it was everybody was now rushing in. And even though Rolex had this history, probably had the best product, it just didn’t matter.
Ben: There was just massive demand for this new product category of which there were many good options.
David: And also there was massive demand. But it was like search engines before Google. The product still sucked. Even really, in many ways the Rolex product. Rolex probably kept better time than competitors.
Ben: They were Kew-A certified.
David: Kew-A certified, right. But if you’re wearing a wristwatch, it’s a lot more exposed to the world than the pocket watch. You talked a little bit about how complex and delicate these movements are, and especially in a miniature movement that goes into a wristwatch, any dust, any water, any humidity that gets into the case is going to jam up your movement and your watch is going to fail.
Ben: Yup.
David: So finally, I had this aha moment when I’m doing the research for this episode. I’d always thought it’s just ridiculous. You go look at the watch market now, Rolex is all the other brands that are waterproof to 57,000 million meters. I’m just like, what? There’s no depth that exists.
Ben: David Rosenthal, watch aficionado, ladies and gentlemen.
David: Exactly. But why? Who cares? I was like, oh, this is why waterproof watches are a big thing. It’s not about water, necessarily.
Ben: It’s actually dust more than water.
David: It’s dust, it’s humidity. If you’re waterproof, that’s shorthand for saying you’re element proof, you’re durable. Nothing is going to get inside this watch and mess up your movement if water can’t get in.
Ben: You could subject it in 100 meters of still water and no impurities would get in.
David: You could throw it to the bottom of the ocean and it’ll keep time forever, et cetera. Like, oh, this is why this is important.
Ben: And servicing was a big deal. You had to get your watch serviced often, and the more dust, humidity, and stuff got in there, it might just break entirely.
David: Exactly.
Ben: Great. I like where you’re going, David. There are basically three big pillars of what makes a Rolex a Rolex, or frankly, what makes a good mechanical watch, a good mechanical watch. There’s precise, there’s officially certified chronometer, and there’s the other two. What’s the second one?
David: Oyster. Like I said, there’s demand for these products, but they all suck because they’re not element-proof. Well, Oyster is Rolex marketing speak for waterproof. There’s this great race among high-end Swiss watchmakers to now produce a waterproof wristwatch.
A Swiss case-making company called Francis Baumgartner, which supplied cases to Patek and many other great watch brands in the early 1920s, invent a new case style called the hermetic. You’ll notice that your Rolex does not say hermetic. The way they do it is they put the watch case inside another watch case.
Ben: Oh, that’s right. This is the weird hinge thing, right?
David: It’s like a scuba helmet. They take a watch and they put it inside a scuba helmet that is waterproof. So it works. It does make watches water- and element-proof, but it’s big, it’s ugly, and most importantly, you have to unscrew the outside case, the seal, and take out the inside case every day in order to wind the watch.
Ben: Because famously, the crown is the most dangerous entry point for water or dust, so you can’t leave the crown sticking out of the hermetic case or it would defeat the purpose.
David: Yup. That’s the state of play through the early 1920s. Rolex gets into this too. They buy cases from Baumgartner and they make these hermetic watches. You can go find them. You see pictures of them in collector’s books.
Ben: It’s got a hinge on the left side and a little clasp on the right side that goes around the crown.
David: Yup. Then—this is so awesome; this is like a Forrest Mars moment from Hans—in October 1925, two Swiss case makers file a patent for a moisture-proof winding stem and button. Ben, just like you’re saying, it’s the crown of the watch, the winding system and the button where water is most on dust or most susceptible to getting into.
Ben: Yup. Mind you, Rolex has been dying to solve this problem. They had at least three failed attempts to create a waterproof seal in-house.
David: The whole industry has, and Hans, like Forrest Mars, reads the Swiss patent filing register religiously every day. He is reading all of the patents that are getting filed in Switzerland. He sees this patent get filed and he’s like, this is it. I got to get this right now.
He goes to the two guys that invented this, buys the patent, and makes it exclusive to Rolex. This turns out that this is the key component to making a waterproof mechanical wristwatch that doesn’t need to be put in a jar.
Ben: When I was reading this, I thought, oh man, Rolex didn’t actually invent the Oyster case. They just watched someone else do it. But that doesn’t really matter. They saw that this was absolutely essential, and Wilsdorf jumped right on the opportunity and said, who cares who came up with the idea? We are in the position to commercialize it, to roll it out across all of our watches. I need to strike first.
David: This is his genius. He’s not a watchmaker. Rolex were not watchmakers until they finally bought Aegler in 2004. Hans’s genius is he sees the vision for where the market’s going. He recognizes talent and innovation. He pulls it together and makes it commercially viable and marketable, in a way that this patent got filed in the Swiss Patent Register. Any of the other watch companies who desperately wanted to solve this problem could have seen it too, but he jumped on it. Really, he’s like the Mark Zuckerberg of his time.
Ben: Ooh, that’s a good analogy.
David: Yeah. It is Instagram and then copying stories from Snap. Hans doesn’t care. He is like, I’m going to market this and I’m going to make this the most successful thing possible. I don’t care that we didn’t invent it.
Ben: It needs to be in our product. That’s interesting.
For anyone who’s a watch person who’s wondering what actually was in the patent, it’s essentially for the screw down crown, the hermetic seal on the all Oyster watches going forward. Of course, it’s named the Oyster because oysters seal when they’re closed. It’s a perfect thing to name it after.
Everything works on a threaded system. The back of the watch screws into the middle part of the case, and then the crown can screw out also. You have these airtight watertight threads that keep any impurities out.
David: So in July 1926, Hans and Rolex goes and registers the product name, Oyster. This is really, really big. Hans, he’s like, I am going to go big. Everybody in the whole world needs to know the Rolex name, needs to know that we are the exclusive owners of the oyster system. He prepares to spend in Britain alone annual expenditures of over 10,000 pounds just on advertising for the Oyster models.
Ben: Dude knows how to build a brand. He’s already naming components. He’s not just marketing Rolex. This is Rolex, the only watch that has Oyster.
David: Oyster technology. A18 bionic. Really the parallels to Apple are just incredible.
Ben: Four hours from now, I was going to make that point, but…
David: So he’s prepared to spend all this money. He’s got the product, but he’s like, we got to do a big launch. I don’t want to just buy regular ads in the newspaper here. So in 1927, towards the end of the year, the timing is right.
That brings us to a young British woman named Mercedes Gleitze. Now Gleitze was a secretary and bilingual stenographer in London, much like young Hans was back at Cuno, who happened to have a unique hobby of endurance swimming in the river Thames in her free time.
Ben: Which is insanely cold.
David: Very cold. I assume even back then quite polluted. But so be it. She was so good at endurance swimming. Apparently, she would swim for 10 hours at a time in the River Thames. In October of 1927, she decided that she was going to attempt to swim across the English channel.
Ben: Maybe even more cold.
David: Definitely cold, definitely pretty choppy. And she did. She became the first British woman to successfully do so that year in October, 1927. However, a couple of days after she completed her swim, another woman emerged and claimed to have also swam the channel, but have done it faster.
Now it turns out that that actually was a hoax. Mercedes knew it was a hoax. But in order to reprove herself, she decided to stage a vindication swim that gets hotly covered by the press.
Ben: Which mind you, she’s doing this vindication swim. She’s already spent 15 hours swimming across the channel.
David: It’s a miracle, she’s still alive at this point. Hans is like, oh, this is our moment. This is exactly the spectacle that we need. He comes up with the brilliant marketing stunt of he is going to get Mercedes to do this vindication swim while wearing a new Rolex Oyster model. what a Rolex doesn’t talk about to these days is a footnote to history of it wasn’t actually on her wrist.
Ben: It’s on a lanyard around her neck.
David: Yeah. It was on a small chain that she wore around her neck. But nonetheless, this is an incredible stunt.
Ben: Nothing ruins a good story like data. Let’s just smooth it over.
David: This is still featured prominently on the Rolex website today.
Ben: Mercedes’s photo is everywhere. But it doesn’t matter. At the end of the day, who cares if it was on her wrist or not?
David: She also doesn’t actually make it. But that doesn’t matter either.
Ben: That’s the other crazy thing. I think it was an especially cold day or especially choppy or something. She makes it 10 of the 15 hours. The design of the test is a little bit arbitrary. This is a watch. While it wasn’t on the wrist and it didn’t make it all the way from England to France…
David: It was still in the water for a long time.
Ben: For 10 hours.
David: Pretty good. Product testimonial, shall we say?
Ben: For a testimonee.
David: So Hans, after this event happens, the next day he buys the front page of the Daily Mail newspaper, which is a nationally syndicated newspaper in Britain at the time. I didn’t realize you could do this back in the day, you could actually buy the front page as an advertisement.
Ben: I think it was common. I think it was a while before the front page was actually dedicated to editorial. early on it was very common for it to be a full-page ad.
David: So Hans does this and proclaims the success and announcement of the world’s first waterproof wristwatch, fully enclosed in its own case without a second hermetic seal around it, and the triumphant launch of the Rolex Oyster.
Ben: This is how Rolex tells the story. After I had heard this told a few different times, I expected to see this full-page ad written in a certain way. It is buried. Maybe this is what the advertising style was back in the day. But the big words are not watch survives English channel Swim. The big words are Rolex Oyster. It says Rolex introduces for the first time the greatest triumph in watchmaking.
Okay, I still don’t know what it is. Then I see a picture of a woman’s face. Then it says, send for this colored brochure. It’s free, telling you to send in for more information. Then there are four sketches of the different watch faces you can get of the Rolex Oyster. Then it says the wonder watch that defies the elements. There are words all over the place.
You finally, finally get to the tiniest text in the entire thing, maybe the second tiniest font in this little corner. It says moisture proof, waterproof, heat proof, vibration proof, cold proof, dust proof.
Either Rolex hadn’t found their groove in advertising yet, or maybe people just read a lot more words back then. But if you put this up today, our Tik-Tok-tified brains would be like, don’t care. Next. There are way too many words. They completely bury the lead that she did a channel swim with this thing and it survived.
David: It’s hard to know how much of this is just the state of the art in advertising at the time, versus Hans designed and wrote all that himself. One of his maniacal control things was, I believe, up until he died or pretty close to it, he did all the creative for all the advertisement.
Ben: Oh, I didn’t realize that.
David: We’ll get to it later. But they do bring on the J. Walter Thompson agency before he dies. Probably the rest of the company’s like, all right Hans. We got to professionalize a little bit here.
Ben: That’s when they get extremely good is in the 1960s.
David: Extremely good.
Ben: But I think it’s fair to say there are two interesting takeaways here. (1) They hadn’t found their groove in advertising yet. (2) Advertising hadn’t really been professionalized in a way that we would see in the madman era.
David: Totally. We’re still before World War II here. We’re not yet in the modern world. The other thing that’s really interesting is there was something about this that was sitting with me too doing this research. This is a major, major, major moment. The Mercedes Gleitze moment, the first brand ambassador of Rolex. It’s interesting that the moment and the person that Hans chose for this launch was a woman.
Ben: Super interesting.
David: Back in 1927. Super interesting. Yes, the wristwatch was a ladies item before World War I. But after World War I, really I would think the big market is the men’s market. It’s interesting. I dug into it. In this era, Rolex still was primarily a ladies product. The men’s market was growing. But if you look at their product catalogs, really up until World War II ladies models outnumbered men’s models 2:1.
Ben: Whoa. These are the little prince watches?
David: Yup. Definitely, Hans’s vision was a wristwatch is for everybody, men and women, but it’s interesting that they were really women-focused. Then we did a little more digging and asked some friends. Even to this day, I believe the market of buyers for Rolex watches is basically 50/50 men and women.
Ben: Which is insane. I never would’ve guessed that, especially because much of my research was lurking on the Rolex and watches subreddits, which are a very particular type of dude. It comes across as a very male thing, at least the way that I’m exposed to watches. You read the amazing journalism about watches on Hodinkee and the whole world around appreciating watches. It’s male-focused.
David: It’s like a Porsche 911.
Ben: It’s amazing that Rolex’s history indexes so heavily to women, and that even today they move a lot of units to women, even though that’s not where I come across Rolex in my day-to-day.
David: It’s certainly not where the enthusiast market is focused. But it’s one of the really unique things about Rolex. So many of the other really, really high-end watch brands, with Cartier as an exception, I think really are men’s brands.
Ben: Oh yes.
David: Whereas Rolex, yeah, it really is 50/50.
Ben: Amazing. All right, so that’s Mercedes Gleitze.
David: That’s the Oyster story. That really is a huge watershed moment for Rolex and for the wristwatch industry.
Ben: And she’s effectively the first testimonee. I’m not sure they’d come up with that terminology yet, but this is something that they would lean heavily into as their means of marketing in the future. They would hate you calling it a brand ambassador.
David: Partner. It’s Rolex partner is what they call it.
Ben: No, I think it’s testimonee. I’m pretty sure it’s this very particular word that they wanted to invent and have to themselves. It’s different from influencer marketing. It’s different from the way that someone appears in advertising a perfume for a five-year deal. I think it’s this very long-term–oriented, you are a part of the brand and you are a part of the brand for your lifetime.
David: Flashing all the way forward, it’s Roger Federer is the purest embodiment of this today, but that is to come in the future. It turns out though, back to the product of the wristwatch, Oyster was huge. But it had a problem. Ben, like you said, the key to making it work, you didn’t have to have the whole scuba jar that you enclosed the whole watch in. But the crown had to screw down. The crown had to screw down like a jar.
That meant that when you went to go wind the watch, you had to unscrew the crown, pull it out, wind the watch, expose it to the elements, and then screw it back in. Well, if you know anything about humans, probably at least half the humans on the planet are not going to be exactly fastidious about screwing their crown back in.
Ben: There are three pillars to what makes this a breakout product, that enables the wristwatch to really have its iPhone moment. That third of being perpetual, of being self-winding, is the magic.
David: These things are so intrinsically linked, I didn’t realize until getting so deep into the research, self-winding watches are cool on their own. But just like before I was like waterproof? Whatever. Why is that important? Self-winding, yeah, seems cool. But how hard is it to manually wind your watch? That’s what people were doing with pocket watches for centuries. It’s actually because it’s tied to the Oyster and the screw down mechanism, if you forget to screw your crown back down, you lose the element proofness of the Oyster.
Ben: Yes. Ah, okay. I can’t wait. The way that the perpetual movement works is totally genius.
David: So back to Oyster and leading into the need for self-winding and the perpetual element of Rolex. If you can create a self-winding wristwatch, well all of a sudden the element proofness of the Oyster works fine for everybody because nobody actually has to unscrew the crown.
Ben: You never have to pop out the battery and put in another one. You never have to charge your Apple Watch. You name the analogy, but you just…
David: Set it and forget it.
Ben: Yup. You walk around all day, your watch keeps perfect time-ish, it’s waterproof, and you never need to wind it. Sounds like an amazing product. Who doesn’t want that?
David: That’s a Steve Jobs–like product right there.
Ben: Before going into the nuance of how Rolex’s particular self-winding mechanism works, I think this is a good time to explain how mechanical watches work at all, what the key components are, and frankly…
David: It’s like alchemy.
Ben: Because one of the coolest things ever done to prepare for an Acquired episode was go learn how a mechanical watch works. At a high level, you need two major components to make a timepiece. First, a way to store energy and second, a way to release that energy in a predictable and precise interval.
David: Which seems like, oh yeah, of course you could do that these days with a battery in electronics. But imagine doing that without a battery and without electronics.
Ben: Exactly. Yes, on that first one, storing energy, there is something called a main spring. Did you read about this in the research, David?
David: Yup.
Ben: A main spring can store potential energy. Imagine a foot-long, skinny piece of metal that you wind real tight and you stuff into something called a barrel. This looks like a film strip that’s stuffed inside a film canister, that you’d see a stack of canisters in a projector room at a movie theater. That’s what you should imagine, a real tightly wound mainspring inside that barrel.
Now interestingly, to your point David, this begs the question, what is a battery?
David: Yes. I said a battery. Technically, that is a battery.
Ben: It’s a mechanical battery since it’s a way to store potential energy to be used later. Now amazingly, the way a mechanical watch works these days is so energy-efficient that the mainspring can store on the order of three days of potential energy to tick the watch forward. It’s amazing.
David: Amazing.
Ben: Okay, so moving on. Obviously this isn’t sufficient on its own. If you just release the main spring in the barrel, it would spin around real fast. It would make all the gears spin and you’d let all the energy out at once.
David: And break the watch.
Ben: So you need something to control the energy release from that main spring and do it in slow fixed time intervals.
David: All mechanically.
Ben: Yes. You need something to make the watch tick.
David: Hey-o.
Ben: Yes. Watchmakers call this an escapement. Now, an escapement in a mechanical watch has two key components to harness that potential energy from the mainspring. One is a pallet fork—come back to that—and two is something called the balance.
How does a pallet fork work? Well, a pallet fork looks like a little T with teeth on the edges of the top of the T. It moves back and forth, a tick and a tock, like the pendulum of a grandfather clock. As it flicks back and forth, it moves all the gears on the watch forward, one tick or one beat.
David: And there’s this element that this may be several steps down the chain, where it’s actually usually the hour movement that then drives all the other movements off of that?
Ben: It depends on the watch and what complications are in it, things like that. But yeah, the important thing to know is when one beat happens, when the pallet fork enables everything to move forward one beat, what it’s really doing is allowing what’s called the escape wheel to turn one click and that drives whatever else is in the gear train for that particular watch.
David: Got you, which some watches are just hours and minutes. Some watches are hours and minutes and seconds. Some watches are dates, day, moon phase, what you had for breakfast, et cetera.
Ben: And with these complications which are the features, it’s really amazing because you can think through what the algorithm would be to make such a complication. But when you’re thinking through it, you’re thinking like a programmer. You’re saying, well if this then that, if the date is 31 days…
David: These are not computers.
Ben: Right. All of the logic is encoded mechanically in a gear train. It’s beautiful. Where we left off here is our escapement where we’ve got the pallet fork, it’s this little T, and it’s a tick and a tock. It flicks back and forth, and moves the gears all forward one tick.
How do you get it to tick back and forth? What is the mechanism by which this pallet fork goes to tick-tock, tick-tock, tick-tock? This is where we introduce a big hero of the whole mechanical watch story. The balance.
The balance also has two parts. There’s a balance wheel and a hairspring. These two things are stuck together around the same center point. Picture the wheel of a bike. That would be the balance wheel, like a hula hoop. Then the gears go around the same axle on a bike. You can imagine that you’ve seen the rear wheel of a bike. In this analogy, those gears are the hairspring and the outer wheel is the balance wheel. That’s what this component looks like.
The hairspring looks really cool. It is another coiled-up piece of metal, although it’s much looser and more fluid than the tightly wound mainspring that we talked about earlier. Unlike everything else that is incredibly tight inside a watch, this component, the balance almost floats and it moves with really low friction. It’s weird because it’s the opposite of everything else that’s in the whole watch.
The way it works is the hairspring spins really fast in one direction. For anyone who’s ever taken a spring and tried to uncoil it you note that it only goes so far and then it wants to go back to its resting position. And then you try to go the other direction and tighten it a little bit. That doesn’t work either. It wants to go back to its natural resting position. That’s what’s happening here.
You’ve got the hairspring, which spins really fast in one direction, and then the energy that it has stored is overcome by the mechanical resistance of unwinding the spring. It stops and then it spins real fast in the other direction. This cycle goes back and forth, spinning back and forth, tick and tock, and flicking that pallet fork back and forth to continually release one little interval of energy and one little advance of the whole gear train. It is beautiful.
David: Amazing. You can totally see why for the right person, this is like a Porsche 911 or it’s just catnip. You can’t get enough of this.
Ben: That’s exactly right. You end up with fancy names and proprietary things that Rolex makes in the far future called a parachrom hairspring that has these amazing renders, animations, and videos of how it works. It’s gorgeous.
Now this happens really fast. This isn’t like I just described it, where you go really far in one direction and then you run out of energy and then you come back. This happens three, four, five, six times per second depending on the watch. That’s if you hold a watch up to you ear and you hear tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick. These beats that’s what you’re hearing. The pallet fork drives that whole gear train, releasing energy that powers the hands and all the other complications, the day, the date, et cetera, at exactly the right pace.
When you take a step back and you look at it all, the craziest thing is that it depends on the exact physical properties of the metals that are used. The time is literally kept by the physical laws of the universe. Elasticity, tensile strength, inertia, potential energy stored by specific materials. They have this down to such a precise science today that watches keep time, certified chronometers keep time within two seconds per day.
David: Bonkers.
Ben: It’s awesome. I just named four parts of a watch. There are 200 parts. This is an oversimplification, but the general concept of how a watch works.
David: The other parts are also amazing. Things like there are jewels in the watch because all of these gears need to turn on things that create friction, so you need extremely low friction things. Well, it turns out that actually rubies and sapphires that are milled into little nuts are the best way to do that. There are actual jewel stones inside your watch that are being used for mechanical purpose.
Ben: And because jewels can be really hard minerals and you don’t want these things to wear out. When you’re slapping something back and forth six times per second, you want to make sure that… Most Rolex watches don’t need to go in for service until every—I don’t know—once a decade? It’s crazy that these things just don’t wear out.
David: Gosh, the Daytona I’m wearing right now, I don’t think it’s ever been serviced. It’s at least 15 years old, if not more than that, and keeps time perfectly.
Ben: It’s so cool. This is a 500 year old art, the idea of the mainspring that applies energy to an escapement that has a balance wheel and a hairspring to oscillate it back and forth. This isn’t new. Every piece of digital technology, heck, most analog technologies are invented after this.
David: Totally. To bring us back to the perpetual on your Rolex watch, you can imagine that adding this element of self-winding to the insane complexity that has been developed over centuries with extreme tolerances that are already in these watch movements, not exactly a trivial thing to do. You can’t just code it up in software.
Ben: No. In particular, what we’re talking about here is, remember I talked about the mainspring that stores three days worth of energy inside the barrel all coiled up? There’s a ton of resistance on that. If you pop open a crown on a watch and you go to turn it with your thumb, it’s hard to turn. If you’re going to come up with a self-winding mechanism, you need some way in which you are using mechanical advantage to wind something that’s already wound really tight, even tighter.
David: So here we are in the late 1920s. Right around this time, a British watch inventor named John Harwood comes up with an automatic system for watches. Now interestingly, that wasn’t his end goal. He was trying to create a waterproof system just like Rolex was.
The way that he went about it was he said, oh yeah, like we were talking about, it’s the winding crown that is the weakest link in the element proofness of a watch. What if I just start by eliminating the winding crown? Can I do that?
Supposedly, he gets inspired one day by watching children play on a seesaw. That gives him the idea for his method of how he creates something called the hammer system of hammer going up and down and hitting different ends inside the watch as the wrist moves around.
Ben: You can imagine that turning a crank, crank, crank, crank, crank.
David: Yup. So he invents this system, and just like his Swiss counterparts who invented what became the oyster system under Rolex, he patents it. Now, what he decides to do, is rather than making a watch out of this, he’s going to create a company that’s just an IP company and he’s going to license this self-winding IP to other watchmakers, which he does. A couple of watchmakers out there take him up on it and incorporate it into their products.
However, it doesn’t prove too popular in the marketplace because a consequence of how he designed the system, the manual winding capability and the crown is eliminated entirely. If your watch stops, if you don’t wear it and you lose the charge in the main spring, good luck getting it going again. You got to wear it for days or whatever to just get the energy back in there. Then you can set the time.
Ben: Oh, interesting.
David: So it’s a pretty big flaw in this watch. But because of how the patent was granted, at least in the UK, he and his company end up holding the rights to all self-winding watch technology.
Ben: Wow. That is broad.
David: In Britain, yeah. No matter what the method is. Or at least that’s my understanding.
Ben: Brutal.
David: Hans, of course, and Rolex sees this. He knows he needs an automatic system for the Oyster to really unlock the potential of the product, and fully break the wristwatch product for the marketplace here. But his hands are tied. He can’t do anything, at least in Britain as long as Harwood has this patent. Hans knows that ultimately the method that Harwood uses is not good. He’s not going to license from Harwood because he knows it’s an inferior implementation.
Then fortunately, fate strikes and the market does its thing. In 1929, Harwood’s company goes bankrupt. Probably aided along by the stock market crash from 1929 and the entering into the Great Depression, et cetera. Finally, the door is now open for Hans and Rolex to complete the product here.
Ben: While we’re here in 1929, just a quick reference point for folks. There was an article published at this time that said you could get a Rolex for as little as $25. Even if you inflation-adjust that, it’s $450 today. Or for as high as $1000, which is $18,000.
Rolex is top of their line today is a lot more than $18,000, and the bottom of their line is a lot more than $450. But that gives you a sense of the type of wealth you would need in order to purchase a Rolex at this point in history. It was a meaningful purchase, but not a purchase reserved for only the elite class.
David: Definitely not. Rolex at this point is not a luxury brand. It’s going to transform into one over the ensuing decades, but no. Now Hans was really, really focused, and his genius and contribution to the field was on creating the product of the wristwatch. He wanted the wristwatch to be on every wrist in the world, which he achieved.
Here we are in the early 1930s. After a couple of years of work, Rolex finally cracks it and patents their own “rotor” self-winding system, which still to this day is the primary method of self-winding across the entire industry. This is a perpetual rotor at the back of the watch case, that spins around in both directions and captures kinetic energy as the wearer moves their wrist around.
Importantly, unlike the hammer movement, it spins 360 freely in either direction. It’s not hitting anything. One of the other problems with the Harwood system was when the hammer struck each end, it made a noise.
Ben: Oh, really?
David: Yeah. You’d wear your watch and you’d go like, clack, clack, clack, clack, clack. One of the initial marketing points for the rotor system, the perpetual system that Rolex comes out with is the silentness of it. They call it the silent self-winding system.
Ben: Oh, that’s really interesting. It’s genius. I’m sure people have seen videos or photos of a self-winding watch. Imagine a disc that sits around a center point and then you cut off half the disc.
What happens is whenever you’re swinging your wrist around or because it’s a near frictionless system, whenever you tilt the watch at all, the heavy side of the rotor falls down due to gravity to whatever side is lower. You’re just constantly all day inadvertently spinning this perpetual rotor around and around and around, and using that to wind the mainspring.
David: It’s an incredible innovation and feat of engineering, stacked on top of all these other incredible feats of engineering that go into mechanical watches. When they first start—you’re adding a new layer to the movement when you do this in the back of the watch—it makes the watch’s back protrude a little bit.
Ben: Oh, the bubble back?
David: Yeah. These early Oyster Perpetuals that are first launched into the market are known by collectors as bubble backs now because the back of them sticks out a little bit onto the wrist off of the lugs.
Ben: It’s so cool. The other fun thing about this is it is legitimately an invention by Rolex. Oyster was licensed, the credit for how accurate they were was really all Aegler’s innovation. This is the first time we’re really seeing Rolex R&D figure out some brand new breakthrough contribution to the watch world.
David: And once this is in place, these are the three key pillars of Rolex technology, and really all mechanical wristwatch technology of quality from this point forward. You’ve got the accuracy, the Chronometer Observatory–certified, you’ve got waterproofness, element proofness via the Oyster, and now you’ve got self-winding with the Oyster Perpetual.
Ben: Here it is. It’s all here.
David: So in 1934, they launched the full system, the Oyster Perpetual chronometer, the bubble backs known by collectors. For the first time, they introduce a new look for the watches, a two-tone mix of steel and gold for these new Oyster Perpetuals that they call Rolesor. It really just rolls off the tongue.
Ben: Right there on your wrist, David.
David: Right there. Not on my Daytona, but it is on my Datejust. This is the gold and steel mix that is now just an iconic Rolex look.
Ben: And that’s where that center link is the gold and the outer two links are the steel.
David: Now you’re talking about the bracelet there. Bracelets for a long, long, long time are made by third party companies. Rolex contracts them out. But that look even goes onto the case itself.
Ben: Oh, okay.
David: The bracelet usually echoes the case. But combining gold and steel within one watch encasement was a new look (shall we say) from Rolex at this time.
Ben: You know what else carries through to today, which is interesting? Rolex and just most tool watches have fluted bezels. The flutedness is because it makes it easier to grip. So when you need to screw the back off, that was the original reason for fluting, was to give you a screw head effectively to get leverage to pop it off.
David: Love it.
Ben: While we’re in the early 1930s, just to breeze us through a bunch of other interesting stuff that’s happening, the first time the crown, the logo, the five point crown starts appearing is 1931.
1931 was a weird year because Rolex was just starting to figure out this perfect product mix. At the same time, the world is heaved into a great depression, and the British pound is devalued. Exports out of Britain drop by two-thirds. Crisis happens.
Rolex is looking to internationally diversify. They open new offices in Paris, Buenos Aires, and Milan. They organize these trips to South America, the West Indies, China, Japan. They’re really trying to figure out how do we stabilize things while the world is in crisis. But they’ve got the right product in market.
David: I feel like there’s an old Sequoia saying, or at least a Mike Moritz saying that recessions are the best time to innovate, because coming out of the recession, you’re going to have the best product ready to hit the gas.
Ben: And fewer competitors.
David: Exactly.
Ben: I will say, very interestingly, in 1932, Omega released a waterproof watch, which is, I don’t know, half a decade after Rolex. This is considered to be the world’s first dive watch. No one talks about this today. You hear dive watch, you think Rolex, but Omega had the first dive watch.
David: You think Submariner, yeah. Ooh, I’ve got some really, really, really fun World War II dive watch stuff in a sec, but before we get to World War II.
Ben: Okay. In 1936—I feel like this is a big moment, kind of exactly what you were saying, as your competitors fall off a cliff due to economic hardship, there’s an opportunity if you have the right product that’s working well in the market to consolidate power—this is when Rolex goes to Aegler and says, hey, we want to take all of your production.
Gruen stops buying movements from Aegler. This is where I think Rolex may have bought the shares back from Aegler. But again, we don’t know and we’ll never know because no one at Rolex will ever talk about that. This is also when Aegler adds Rolex to its name.
David: The Aegler manufacturer of Rolex watches.
Ben: Yes. Take us into World War II.
David: At the beginning of the war in 1940, remember Rolex is in Switzerland, exporting to the UK which was still by far their biggest market, gets cut off. Supply lines from central Europe to the UK are cut off after France falls.
Rolex and all the other Swiss watch makers are like, well shoot. Okay. If we can’t get to England, we got to go find other markets to sell to. It’s like the beginning of COVID when all these companies were making up other products and doing all sorts of stuff. This is my very favorite sidebar piece of trivia.
Ben: Ooh, I have no idea where you’re going.
David: Ddo you know what Rolex did in Italy during this time?
Ben: I have no idea.
David: They’re casting about, they’re trying to find something. Their retail partner in Italy gets a contract from the Italian Navy to supply watches to their divers. This Italian retail partner comes to Rolex and is like, hey, we got a contract for dive watches. Can you make dive watches for us? Rolex is like, yeah, sure, we can do that. We are sitting on our hands here at our factories.
Ben: Which is funny because this is a decade-and-a-half before the Submariner.
David: This is the first dive watch that Rolex makes. Can you guess the name of the Italian retail partner?
Ben: I feel like it’s going to be a, I don’t know, car company?
David: No. It’s even more on the nose. This is Panerai. This is the Panerai watch. Ben: Oh really?
David: Rolex makes the Panerai watch. Anybody who knows Panerai, famous, very art deco style dive watch. They have two main models now. The Luminor and the Radiomir. Panerai was a retailer before World War II. They weren’t a watchmaker. Then after the war, Panerai kept going making these watches. Isn’t that amazing?
Ben: Totally amazing. This also underscores another reason why Switzerland was such a watchmaking powerhouse. This is a very engineering-heavy industrial thing. They didn’t have to devote any resources to the war because they were completely neutral. All of their craftspeople and machinists and everything can keep making watches.
David: Yup, and here they are selling to the Italian Navy on the axis side. Meanwhile, the thing that they’re most focused on is trying to figure out some way to start re-exporting to Britain, selling to their old main market on the allied side.
They do figure out later in 1940 how to get watches back into Britain. They launder them first through Spain and Portugal, and then through the Strait of Gibraltar, get up to Britain.
This becomes critical. World War I made the market for the wristwatch, but World War II made the precision wristwatch market super important. If you’re a soldier in the trenches in World War I, yeah, you need to coordinate movements and time and whatnot. If you’re a military service member in World War II, it is a very technical war involving a lot of technology involving airplanes, involving aircraft carriers.
Ben: And synchronized attacks.
David: All sorts of things—tanks, synchronized attacks, all this stuff, stealth. The air Battle of Britain is such a key moment in the war key theater. All of these British Royal Air Force pilots are all wearing Rolex watches, because at this point Rolex makes the best wristwatch.
It is the most accurate, the most weatherproof to all the elements. You’re going through all sorts of pressure changes going up, going down. These “cabins,” if you could call them that of World War II fighter planes, there’s no pressurization in there. These watches need to be able to withstand a lot of elements. Usually you’re navigating by them, you might be flying in the dark.
Ben: Wow.
David: Super, super important stuff.
Ben: Again, I would push back. I would suspect Omega is the leading brand at this time. Omega was thriving in the 1940s, 1950s, even into the 1960s in the Swiss watch world.
David: That is definitely true. Rolex weren’t the only ones that were selling to both sides here. But nonetheless, World War II is really changing the nature of what you need out of a wristwatch.
Air battles are maybe the most visceral. But then you start to think about all the other stuff that went into World War II. There’s radio communications, there’s radar, there’s early computing, there are nuclear weapons and technology coming out of that. There are scientists that are building all these things. Time is like a really, really important element for this stuff.
You’ve really got this birth of a new military use case, but then soon to be transitioned to professional need for watches and for time in the world.
Ben: So interesting. Well, coming out of the war is really when Rolex starts to figure out their product lineup. We talked about, oh, they had the perfect product at the perfect time with this Oyster Perpetual, officially certified chronograph.
Well, what that looked like in product form was all kinds of crap. They all said that and that’s how they all worked. But the cases were everything you could imagine. It’s not like you could browse on their website and see we make these six main families of watches with these sub variations underneath. It was far from it.
You look at these old advertisements and catalogs and you’re like, I don’t even know what that thing is called because it just looks so different from everything else. As they’re coming out of the war, this is when they’re starting to figure out, oh, a standardized product lineup. Not quite yet, but soon we’re going to build brand around each one of these things, who it’s for, and what it says about you if you wear this type of watch.
David: You are foreshadowing tool watches or sport watches. A watch for a specific technical use case, or more accurately a watch that says something about you as the wearer.
That is the legacy of World War II to come on the product side. But first just on the market side, as soon as the war is over, there’s no more European market. Europe is in shambles. But you know what market there is, is America.
Ben: Yeah, who didn’t have their cities all just destroyed and bombed to oblivion, has disposable income, and GIs returning home.
David: Who is a top new world order now, at least on the capitalist side. I don’t think communists were buying a lot of Rolexes.
Ben: I’m sure there are some crazy stories about black market communist dealers of Rolexes to Russia post-World War II. I’m sure that happened.
David: There must be. I’m pretty sure Castro famously loved Rolexes.
Ben: I think he even wore two. There are like some photos of him where he is wearing two Rolexes.
David: Amazing.
Ben: I’m looking it up right now.
David: Nothing screams communism like multiple Rolexes on your wrist.
Ben: Here it is. He’s wearing (I think) a Rolex GMT and a Submariner on the same wrist.
David: Yes.
Ben: He referred to one as a backup in case the first stops working. But that’s extremely unlikely. I suspect it’s to keep Moscow time.
David: Or he just wanted to wear two Rolexes on his wrist because he could.
Ben: Exactly.
David: Okay. Well the non-black market for Rolex is after the war, if you’re going to go somewhere, you’re going to go to America. Hans and the company devised just about the most genius three putt scheme to get there imaginable.
Get this. In 1945—
Ben: Rolex would never three putt.
David: Tiger Woods wouldn’t. Rolex brand testimony. Okay, 1945 right after the war ends is also the 40th anniversary of the founding of Wilsdorf and Davis, the Ruby Jubilee of the company. For the occasion, Rolex launches their finest model yet, the Datejust. This is the first modern Rolex, still an iconic watch sold by the company today. It’s just beautiful. I’ve got one here in front of me.
Ben: For a lot of people, if they don’t picture a Submariner, when you hear Rolex, they picture a Datejust.
David: Or a Daytona, but we’ll get to that. Launched alongside the Datejust is the Jubilee bracelet, which is the iconic beaded Rolex bracelet we all know now. They name it the Jubilee. Hans—remember he wants to get into the American market—initially wanted to call it the Victory bracelet. But his Swiss colleagues were like, that’s not very Swiss. We are neutral. So it becomes the Jubilee bracelet.
Ben: Beautiful. It goes great with a fluted bezel. It just adds a little more pizazz to the wrist.
David: Right around this same time, Rolex manufactures their 50,000th officially certified Swiss chronometer, and just happens of course that that model is the new Datejust.
Hans decides that he is going to give this very special Rolex watch to the Swiss general, Henri Guisan, who led Switzerland through the war. National hero in Switzerland. The Dwight Eisenhower of Switzerland, one might say.
Ben: What does that even look like to lead Switzerland through the war?
David: That’s a good question.
Ben: A lot of sitting.
David: Well, remember this is a three putt. This is just the first putt here. Guisan gladly accepts this great watch. Well Rolex is really ramping production here now, so it turns out a few months later they make their 100,000th chronometer that they have certified here.
Ben: Oh, this one goes to Winston Churchill.
David: This one Hans goes to General Guisan, newly christened Rolex convert and says, would you please on our behalf offer this to your dear friend, sir Winston Churchill? Winston Churchill accepts. Now Winston Churchill is a Rolex man.
Well, in less than a year later, Rolex made their 150,000th officially certified chronometer, once again in the now new top of the line Datejust model. Who does Hans go to for this one? Through not directly but with some influence of the fact that his friend Sir Winston Churchill wore it, he goes to General Dwight D. Eisenhower, American hero, leader of the Allied Forces, architect of the Allied victory in this new world order. Eisenhower, because his good friend Churchill wears Rolex, says, how could I not accept? And so now Dwight Eisenhower becomes a Rolex man.
Then a few short-termyears later in 1952, Eisenhower becomes president of the United States of America, with his iconic gold Rolex Datejust on his wrist at almost all times.
Ben: This is the very first time that Rolex gets the idea of what all of their future marketing and positioning will be, which is those who command the world wear Rolex.
David: So at this time, Rolex finally brings on a third-party advertising agency, the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency in New York. Rolex and J. Walter Thompson, in collaboration after Eisenhower becomes president wearing his Datejust, launch a campaign in the US almost literally what you said, Ben, the tagline of the campaign is, men who guide the destinies of the world wear Rolex watches.
Ben: They printed this.
David: Yes.
Ben: That is on the advertisement.
David: All over magazines across America. Maybe the world, too, I don’t know. It’s incredible.
Ben: Men who guide the destinies of the world wear Rolex watches. Shameless,
David: So many things to say. Obviously, today that would be people not men. But it’s also literally true. You got Eisenhower, you got Churchill, you got Castro wearing Rolexes.
Ben: I’m going to save for later in the 1960s and 1970s, some of their advertising campaigns. But there are a few sentences that we just have to say do show up, that is along these lines. There’s one that is, when a man has the world in his hands, you expect to find a Rolex on his wrist.
David: This is Don Draper. This is better than Don Draper.
Ben: A Rolex will never change the world. We leave that to the people who wear them.
David: Oh. We can just end the episode here.
Ben: Now that is brand positioning.
David: That is true brand positioning. The fact that they engineered getting one on the wrist of the president of the United States is so genius.
Ben: And interestingly, even though they started with Mercedes Gleitze this idea of human achievement, accomplishment, and the top of their field, they aren’t doing that in this era. It is about the people who command the world. They later on come back to achievement and the people who are scientists—again, I’ll save it for the 1960s and 1970s—this is a very clear positioning of those who command the world.
David: Now the problem (I guess) with those who command the world as just absolutely gangster as it is, is ultimately you’re talking about a small market. Now it’s great aspirational, it helps the brand halo and whatnot, but more people, especially as we enter the 1950s and 1960s, want to be Arnold Palmer (shall we say) than want to be Dwight Eisenhower.
One final little product sidebar on the Datejust that I just love. The original Datejust had the date window. It’s called the Datejust because it’s a regular watch with a little window on the dial that has the number of the date of the month in there.
Ben: In place of the three. If you’re picturing one today, you probably picture that magnifier that’s sitting on this.
David: Well, the magnifier, the cyclops eye in Rolex marketing speech, of course. The legend of how that came about is Hans’s second wife, Betty Wilsdorf Mettler—his first wife Ana died tragically in 1944, right before the end of World War II—that is actually when Hans sets up the Hans Waldorf Foundation and puts all of his ownership of the company into it.
Ben: Famously, he never had any family heirs. There was no one to pass the company to, so he creates this foundation.
David: His second wife, Betty, loved the Datejust, and still to this day, the Lady Datejust (I believe) is the single best-selling model in the Rolex catalog.
Ben: Well, yeah. They have eight watches for men and one for women. Of course that one’s good, 50% are bought by women. Women wear Submariners and stuff too, but like, come on. You’re concentrating 50% of your sales into one “model.”
David: Betty loved the Datejust but had a tough time reading the small numbers of the date in the window. As the story goes, one day while Hans is getting ready in his bathroom in the morning, he’s wearing a Datejust and a drop of water drips onto it right above the date window, and it magnifies the date that he—
Ben: I tell you can’t make this stuff up, but they made this stuff up.
David: They made this stuff up, yeah. He shouts, I got it. I got it. It’s like the eureka moment in the bathtub. That is the inspiration for the Cyclops window of the Datejust.
Ben: If you’re at Rolex and you’re listening to this, and you want to tell us no, it really is true, hello@acquired.fm.
David: We will happily come to Geneva and talk to you about it. Okay, so Ben, as you were saying though, the Datejust.
Ben: It’s a dress watch. It’s a watch that you wear if you are commanding the world, you’re wearing a suit, and you are amongst other respectable people. But what Rolex does from 1950 onward is yeah, of course we make that. But we want to make a watch that you can wear while you’re doing your extreme activity. That’s going to look great when you show up to dinner afterwards too.
David: And that is the core of the brand today, which gets built in the 1950s under André—
Ben: Sports watches.
David: It’s sports watches, it’s the Submariner, it’s the Explorer, it’s the GMT Master, it’s the Daytona, the modern sport watches. And like you said, these are very different from what Churchill and Eisenhower are wearing.
André Heiniger, the second CEO of Rolex after Hans. André joined the company in 1948, right after the war. He was a former lawyer (I believe) by training. He first goes to South America and runs the South American market for Rolex. Then he comes back to headquarters in Geneva and becomes the director of marketing.
He’s the one who brings on J. Walter Thompson. He’s the one who does the Destinies of the World campaign. Then in 1955 (I believe) he becomes the director of watches. Bringing on J. Walter Thompson, revamping the marketing message, opening up the Americas market and really the US market, that’s his purview here. Later on, he starts working with Mark McCormack and IMG, which is the talent agency that we’ll get into for the testimonees.
What André realizes is that now here in the 1950s and into the 1960s ahead, all the technology, engineering, and innovation that went into Rolex in the 1930s to perfect the product of the wristwatch is no longer defensible. You mentioned Omega, but basically anybody else, certainly any other Swiss company, can make a perfectly on-parity watch to what Rolex can make at this point in time.
Ben: There are 30 Swiss companies doing this, especially because of the établissage, all of the component manufacturers are outside the brand. You just go around all the component manufacturers. Rolex is a little different because they have Aegler. But in general, you can go around to find all the different tiny little shops that are making each of these components, buy it, and make a watch.
David: Totally. All the stuff that Hans was a genius at isn’t going to cut it in terms of differentiation for this new era. What Rolex now needs to do is move beyond what the actual product is on your wrist to more what does it say about you? That you’re wearing it to the brand of the company itself. What a signaling is, what it means about you. This is the first step towards becoming a luxury brand.
I don’t know that André and they were thinking about it necessarily as luxury yet—and it’s not really luxury yet, it’s much more lifestyle at this point in time; it would later become luxury—but this is his real, real genius. From 1953 to 1955, Rolex—and again, Hans is still running the company; he dies in 1960—Hans, André launch a whole suite of wild new models, very different from the Datejust and the Oyster Perpetuals that we were talking about before.
This is the Explorer, the Turn-O-Graph, the Submariner, the Milgauss, and the GMT-Master. These are what are then initially called the tool watches, but quickly morph into becoming known as the sport watches.
Ben: The industry refers to them as sport watches or tool watches. Rolex calls them professional watches, which is funny because it’s the opposite of what you oh, a professional watch you would think is the Datejust, but they’re thinking about it as more of like a professional race car driver. That’s their—
David: A professional pilot.
Ben: Yes. You’ll continue to see this in everything that is in the Rolex universe is we don’t want to be lumped into any category, so we have to refer to something entirely different such that we can’t be put into a box. They don’t make sports watches. They make professional watches. In the same way that there’s something called the Rolex Way.
David: You mean like the Vision Pro is not augmented reality?
Ben: Exactly, the Rolex Way. There’s this YouTube video they put out describing the Rolex Way, and they just list all the things that they’re not. It’s not limitless because that’s too limiting. Everything in the Rolex universe needs to be described in a way that it’s too impossible for you to describe. It’s just simply Rolex.
David: Amazing. Okay, back to this suite of really world-changing tool watches, or at least watch world-changing tool watches.
Ben: Professional watches, David.
David: Professional watches, I’m sorry. First is the Turn-O-Graph, as perhaps foreshadowed by that really great name there.
Ben: What a horrible name.
David: That’s the least successful of these watches that they launch. You’re not going to be buying any Turn-O-Graphs from authorized Rolex dealers these days.
Ben: But David, if you look at a Turn-O-Graph, what’s the original one look like?
David: Well, it looks like the GMT-Master, we’ll get back to that in a sec. The key professional feature of the Turn-O-Graph was it had a rotating bezel around the dial, around the face of the watch that you could use for timing different events. The way Rolex marketed this as this was going to be for international business people who were making international phone calls and needed to time the length of the phone call.
Ben: Really? I never. That’s funny. Swing and a miss.
David: Swing and a miss. Not exactly really a romantic lifestyle you want to be associated with.
Ben: Saving pennies on your, I guess at the time it was saving $10 at a time on your long distance calls.
David: Sure. But it’ll come back. The next least successful one is the Milgauss.
Ben: I love this watch.
David: I know. This one is awesome. This has a whole second life. It was designed in association with the engineers at CERN in Switzerland, the particle accelerator, for scientists who are working while exposed to strong magnetic fields. The idea was that this Milgauss was so well-protected from magnetic fields that you could wear it in these environments and it would still tell accurate time.
Ben: Which you can understand why this would be a big deal. If you have a metallic hairspring that is the primary thing making your watch tick, you walk into some of these environments that scientists are operating in and yeah, your watch is going to speed up or slow down.
David: Yup, so a little more romantic than timing international business calls in terms of the inspiration for this, but not a large market for people who are scientists or aspiring to work in strong magnetic field areas. They discontinued that after a couple of years, but then they bring it back in 2007. It’s awesome. It’s got this lightning bolt second hand on it.
Ben: It’s so cool. And the colors are great. It’s got this really fun orange… I’ve been contemplating whether I want to get an Explorer or a Milgauss. It’s effectively the same watch, but the Milgauss has this very fun scientific origin and look to it.
David: Ooh, I could totally see you rocking either one.
Ben: It just feels me, doesn’t it?
David: Yeah, it does. You definitely have got the Explorer. You love exploring, backpacking. You’ve got that great iconic picture. Is that picture of you and your dad still up in…
Ben: Oh yeah. Behind me in my home studio? Yup. Backpacking Iceland.
David: Yup. But I feel like the Milgauss might be more you.
Ben: I know. Both great watches.
David: Oh, both great watches. Okay, that’s number two. Then the first really big one, the Explorer, Ben, like you were talking about.
Ben: Which the story is so awesome for this.
David: So awesome. Supposedly it is made in honor of Sir Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay’s summit of Mount Everest, the first human summiting of Mount Everest.
Ben: 1953, I think?
David: I believe it was 1953, yes.
Ben: And they wore an Oyster Perpetual up, that was a prototype of what the Explorer would be.
David: Yup. All of these tool watches here—sorry, professional watches—all of them, they prototyped in partnership with various people who were living these lifestyles, doing these human achievements. Now, the legend is that Sir Edmond Hillary and Tenzing Norgay were working with Rolex, wearing Rolexes, summiting Everest wearing Rolexes.
Ben: That is in the marketing today. That is the lore around the brand today.
David: And importantly, both of them become official Rolex testimonees, Brandon Bass’s partners afterwards. They will, for the rest of their lives, tell you how much they love Rolex.
Ben: However, Sir Edmund Hillary did not prefer his Rolex. He had a Smiths watch that he preferred to wear.
David: And I think the Smiths was the official outfitter of the expedition, and Rolex was not.
Ben: I do believe both watches ended up on the summit. I think that it’s likely, whether it was on wrists or in backpacks or what the deal is, but it’s just funny that there’s super tightly associated with Rolex is that summiting of Everest and like eh, they were interested. It was there.
David: Yup. But the Explorer designed for withstanding extreme pressure changes, being able to go up to the summit of Everest and still work fine. Gosh, imagine yet another modern endeavor where timekeeping is critically important and means the difference between life and death. You need to rely on your watch when you’re summiting Everest.
Ben: It’s a really robust watch. There are not a lot of moving parts, there are not a lot of complications. There’s not a spinning dial.
David: Easily readable in the elements.
Ben: Exactly.
David: That’s the Explorer. It goes on to become iconic, extremely popular still to this day. Then there’s the Submariner, an equally fun origin myth story, shall we say.
Ben: If you separated Submariner from Rolex, Submariner may actually be a bigger deal. Submariner is its own whole franchise.
David: Absolutely.
Ben: Almost in the way that’s like what if you separated the Dallas Cowboys from the NFL? Who’s the more important brand? The Sub is. If you’re going to get a Rolex and you’re intending to have multiple, you should start with the Sub because it’s just so iconic.
David: You’re right. It is really its own world.
Ben: It was Sean Connery’s watch even before when he started playing James Bond.
David: All right. Let’s get into it. The Submariner is the Rolex professional diving watch. As we talked about, not the first dive watch that Rolex made. That would be the Panerai.
Ben: But that’s not what you know. What you know is the Sub is a great dive watch that Rolex makes and defines a category.
David: Yes. Works and is waterproofed down to 100 meters in depth. Not a lot of people who are buying these things are going down to 100 meters. But there we go.
Ben: Although I must say, I think this is an overlooked thing about this category. That’s 100 meters in depth if there were no pressure changes and you weren’t whipping your hand around. It’s nice to have 100 meters of depth so that if you’re going 20 meters in depth and things happen, you might at some given second while you’re whipping your arm around or something weird happens on your water, approach the limit even though you’re actually far from 100 meters below.
David: I believe at some point, Rolex starts actually testing their watches to significantly greater depth than what is advertised for this reason.
Ben: That’s correct. Most of them I think are at 10% extra margin of safety, but I think the dive watches are an extra 25%.
David: You don’t want to be like, oh, I’ve got a 300 meter depth watch, and get down to 300 meters and think you’re good, but actually go to 305.
Ben: A 100-meter waterproof watch is nice, even just for going in swimming pools. I’m not sure I would want a 10 meter waterproof watch. It feels dangerous.
David: But it’s not really about the waterproofness here. Around this time, 1952–1953, much of popular culture is focused on a Frenchman named Jacques Cousteau. Probably rings a bell to many of you. Jacques Cousteau was the first world-famous undersea explorer. He actually invented scuba diving.
Ben: Oh, interesting.
David: He was a total renaissance man, genius. In 1953, he’s filming the documentary, The Silent World, in the Mediterranean Sea that is going to go on to win the Oscar, the Academy Award for best documentary (I think) in 1956. But the whole world is watching these exploits, discovering the depths of the ocean, this whole alien world for the first time along with Jacques. He’s doing so and going down in these machines while wearing Rolex watches.
Ben: Great.
David: So great. Now interestingly, there’s not an actual formal relationship between Jacques and Rolex. Actually, Rolex was formally working with another undersea explorer who it didn’t become nearly as famous. Nonetheless, Jacques was a Rolex fan, was wearing Rolexes while doing all this, as was much of his crew. Then when the movie comes out, they’re all wearing these Rolexes.
Ben: And it’s important to remember for people who scuba dive out there, you have a dive computer these days. I remember when I got Patty certified. Even your very first few dives, you’re not wearing a dive watch. You’re using a dive computer. At this time, this was a legitimate tool that you needed. It’s not going to tell you your depth the way that a dive computer is, but in order to know your total bottom time, and…
David: In the same way if you’re summiting Everest, well even more so than if you’re summiting Everest, you really need a Submariner, a dive watch if you’re diving.
Ben: This isn’t cute. This is an essential tool to complete this extreme task.
David: That’s great for marketing here. But then 1962, the very first James Bond movie, Dr. No, comes out.
Ben: As it is written in Ian Fleming’s James Bond books.
David: Yes, because of course Ian Fleming himself was a Rolex man. Of course James Bond wears Rolexes. Now canonically—I didn’t know this until doing the research—did you know that at least according to Ian Fleming cannon, James Bond’s mother is Swiss and his father is British, kind of like you might say Rolex itself is.
Ben: Oh, interesting.
David: So Sean Connery wears a Submariner in Dr. No. Then Connery (I believe) would wear Subs for all of his Bond movies. Ben, like you said, was in real life a Sub guy himself.
Ben: I think that’s right.
David: There is no bigger. If you’re trying to build a lifestyle brand, one of the first lifestyle brands in the modern world, there’s nothing better that you could do.
Ben: And this persisted from 1962 until 1995.
David: Yes, with Golden Eye.
Ben: When Pierce Brosnan came in, they wanted to refresh Bond’s brand image, and they chose Omega for that one.
David: Oh wow. That’s really charitable of you to the Bond franchise there.
Ben: No, it is.
David: Now, come on. Omega paid them a boatload of money for product placement.
Ben: They did eventually, but initially it was not a paid placement.
David: Really?
Ben: Yeah.
David: I was almost certain that 1995 was when they decided to bid out all the stuff.
Ben: Well, let’s put it this way. If it was bid out, Rolex would decline to bid because Rolex does not engage in paid product placement.
David: That’s why I assumed the only way Bond would stop wearing Rolex. I guess maybe you could make an argument that you’re trying to reboot the franchise around Pierce Brosnan. Pierce Brosnan maybe is more of an Omega guy than a Rolex guy.
Ben: There’s some weird line that they used around trying to reboot him with more of a European modern flare or something.
David: Come on. No way. I don’t believe it. They freaking bid it out. There’s no way that James Bond is not a Rolex guy.
Ben: And certainly eventually Omega is paying a boatload of money to the James Bond franchise, so much so that there’s a bump in Omega sales every five years when a Bond movie comes out. A huge bump.
David: Goldeneye was when BMW launched the Z3 Coupe, right? So Goldeneye was totally product placement central.
Ben: And now Bond movies, the whole budget’s covered by product placement.
David: They only exist for product placement.
Ben: I don’t know. One of the sources I found on watchesofespionage.com details, apparently the costume designer reached out to Omega and was given for free a Seamaster. There’s (I think) even a quote, “There was no product placement incentive in 1995 whatsoever. I went to them and of course they were interested, but it was no more than helping us. They gave us watches for nothing.”
It definitely turned into a backup, the truck boatload of money thing. But the Omega fans will insist that it was an organic thing at first.
David: Okay, maybe that’s right. Anyway the point is, from 1962 until 1995, if you like James Bond and you wanted to have a little bit of James Bond in your life too, then you wanted to wear a Submariner on your wrist.
Ben: It’s perfect. James Bond does a lot of diving, and then he goes right from diffusing the undersea bomb with the Bond girl, to then popping up and going to this high class dinner afterwards. He’s all wearing the same watch the entire time.
David: It’s perfect. Super fun, little coda on the Submariner. A few years later in 1967, do you know the story of the Sea-Dweller, which I believe is still in the Rolex lineup to this day?
Ben: It is. Is this the one that’s like the super Sub? That’s like a Submariner, but you can go real deep.
David: It’s the super Sub, yes. Rolex develops this in partnership with the French undersea exploration company, COMEX. There’s this issue where helium would get trapped in the watch in the Submariner, and the pressure would break it as you’re coming back up.
They developed the Sea-Dweller, which is waterproofed down to 600 meters, and has a special helium release valve. This is ridiculous. No person who is going to buy these actually is going to use this stuff except for COMEX employees that are being issued them. But it adds to the romance, it adds to the this is a lifestyle purchase.
Ben: Okay. If you’re already taking us from Submariner to Sea-Dweller, you got to take us to Deepsea Challenge. This is the ultra ultra version.
David: All right, go for it.
Ben: So they develop a watch. This thing is so thick, you’re not putting this on your wrist. But they design a watch and they said, well what if we take this idea of originally the Submariner, then the Sea-Dweller, and we make this thing called the Deepsea.
David: And there was an earlier version of this before James Cameron, right?
Ben: Yeah. Well the Cameron one (I believe) is the Deepsea Challenge, which is an extra, extra version, and the challenge is the one that’s the 11,000 meter, whereas the regular Deepsea is just regular all 3900 meters. You get the Deepsea for 3900 meters. The Deepsea Challenge to really get to the bottom, the 11,000 meter.
James Cameron, on a man submersible, takes the Sea-Dweller Deepsea Challenge—it actually is (I think) all of those brands; they include the sub-brand with the parent brand in this thing—down to the Marianas Trench to the deepest part of the ocean.
This thing is clipped onto the outside of the submarine because it’s useless to have it inside. Humans would get crushed by this pressure if they were on the outside. But the watch keeps perfect time, keeps all the water out all the way to the deepest part of the ocean.
David: Amazing.
Ben: And of course James Cameron testimonee.
David: Yes, of course, of course. So that’s going down to the bottom of the sea, very romantic lifestyle association.
Ben: By the way, isn’t it interesting? All these are in English. All these watches have English names.
David: Yeah, what’s the market here? It’s American. Come on.
Ben: So take us airborne, David.
David: Yeah, so we’ve gone down. Now we’ll go up. That brings us to the GMT-Master (the Greenwich Mean Time Master). In 1955, Boeing launched the 707 commercial jet airliner based on an Air Force air-to-air refueling tanker design. I didn’t know that until this episode.
Ben: Neither did I.
David: And the next year in 1956, Pan Am, the iconic American airline, begins flying intercontinental jet flights with the Boeing 707 for the first time. The jet age for the consumer is born, and along with it jet lag. It’s a new concept. If you traveled across continents before you didn’t move fast enough, that you experienced jet lag.
Pan Am is worried about the effects of jet lag on its pilots. The pilots are going back and forth all the time across the Atlantic Ocean or the Pacific Ocean or whatever. They decide that the best thing to do is to keep the pilots operating on their home time.
Let’s say the pilots are based out of New York, they need to operate on New York time, even if they’ve just landed in London. The way that they’re going to do that is they’re going to work with Rolex and develop a new professional watch for their pilots that can for the first time tell time simultaneously in two different time zones.
Ben: Amazing.
David: So Rolex takes the failed Turn-O-Graph, which isn’t selling well, but has the rotating bezel, remember?
Ben: Bidirectional rotating bezel, importantly, because the submariner is just one. Well maybe not at first, but eventually becomes just one so you don’t screw up and do something you don’t want to with it.
David: Yup. They change the markings on the bezel from 60 minutes or 60 demarcations that it was on the Turn-O-Graph to 24 hours. Then they add in a fourth hand on the movement that moves at a 24 hour movement. All of a sudden you can now on one single watch face keep track of two different time zones, and the GMT-Master is born. You are the master of time with this watch.
Ben: Legitimately, very, very useful. Whenever you and I travel for Acquired, I set the complication in the lower right of my Apple Watch to be the home time. because it’s just really nice to keep track of home time in addition to where I am right now.
David: Totally. That’s pretty cool. Eventually they launch two-tone on the rotating bezel, the most famous of which being red on one half and blue on the other half, the Pepsi model. So cool.
Ben: They do all these great limited editions. The Sprite.
David: The Batman, gray and black.
Ben: It’s great. The community comes up with little nicknames for all the different colors schemes that they do here.
David: Super, super fun. Now this is for air travel and jet travel, but of course the pinnacle of 1960s and 1970s romance up in the air is not air travel but space travel.
Ben: Yup. Oh yes.
David: Which brings us to the Apollo missions, four of which standard issue from NASA is the Omega Speedmaster.
Ben: Which again, I will say bolsters my case that in the 1940s, 1950s, 1960s, Omega was the big brand. Rolex had a target in mind to beat, and that target was Omega who was bigger.
David: But even though Omega was standard issue on the Apollo missions, not all of the Apollo astronauts chose to wear their standard issue watches. If you go to Rolex headquarters, there is an incredible signed picture from Apollo 13, the Apollo 13 mission, the Tom Hanks movie, signed by astronaut Jack Swigert, a character who’s played by Kevin Bacon in the movie.
“To my longtime friend, René Jeanneret,” who I believe was Rolex head of communications at the time, “who enabled me to always be on time.” Jack and (I think) maybe some of the other astronauts, too, preferred GMT-Masters and wore their GMT-Masters during the Apollo missions.
Ben: Interesting. Like you said, the Omega Speedmaster famously is the moon watch. In many ways, it’s the big blemish in Rolex’s whole strategy of being the brand for people who accomplish the greatest heights in human history. But this is a great little way to slide in and take a little slice of that history too. And by the astronaut’s choice, much like Sean Connery.
David: What could be better? Not going to wear this inferior product. Now, I’m sure this is a Rolex’s version of history, but supposedly NASA reached out to Rolex first because they knew that test pilots preferred GMT-Masters. But there was a mix up in Rolex’s New York purchasing office that led to this mishap of Omega being selected instead.
Ben: If you work at Omega, please contact us and tell us what is the real version of this story. We know no one at Rolex is going to call, so let’s hear at least Omega’s side of this.
David: Whatever the case, this is all just building so much legend in lore, romance, and the ultimate lifestyle brand here. And like I said earlier, this really is the architecting of André Heiniger. We talked about the J. Walter Thompson relationship, but I had mentioned Mark McCormack and IMG, starting here in the mid-1960s with IMG’s when they really turbocharge and formalize this testimony brand ambassador partnership relationship.
Ben: And they are doing two-pronged here. These professional watches are happening, but they’ve also advanced their dress line.
David: They’ve come out with the Daydate.
Ben: The President, as its nicknamed.
David: The President. It was so ironic that the first president to wear a Rolex wore the Just, not a Daydate.
Ben: But future presidents wore Daydates.
David: Yes. But anyway, back to IMG. IMG was the first modern talent celebrity endorsement agency, and really visionary of Mark McCormack to have founded in 1960. He brokered tons of celebrity endorsements. He works with Rolex, and they sign the “big three” in the golf world. First Arnold Palmer, then Gary Player, and then Jack Nicklaus. For their whole careers, I believe probably their whole lives, they are Rolex men.
Ben: Tthat is effectively the blueprint for everyone from Federer to Tiger Woods forward.
David: Just in golf if you go forward, Tiger Woods, Annika Sörenstam, today Scottie Scheffler, Jordan Spieth, Justin Thomas, Brooke Henderson, Lydia Ko. Not everybody, but at least a large share of the best players are Rolex players.
Ben: Well it’s interesting because when you list them off like that, yeah it sounds like a large group, but I think the strategy is not a lot, the strategy is only the best.
David: A large share of the very best players.
Ben: And that goes for individual athletes. But it also goes for which events they sponsor. I was talking to Ben Clymer at Hodinkee, and he pointed out that they don’t just sponsor PGA Tour. They sponsor The Masters. They’re not going to really mess around much beyond that. Similar to tennis, like yeah, we’ll do Wimbledon.
David: And now they do all four grand slams.
Ben: Ah, okay.
David: So yeah, arguably tennis, especially post Federer, is even more iconic Rolex than golf is. They partner with many of the top, top players in the world. But Federer really was transformational.
Ben: I think that’s right.
David: I don’t think the Federer-Rolex relationship is quite like a Michael Jordan-Nike relationship, but it’s in that next tier of great athlete partnerships.
There are a couple of really interesting things about golf and tennis, specifically, for Rolex. One, just the overall brands of the sport mesh very well with Swiss luxury watch companies. But also even going all the way back to the 1930s and the Wilsdorf days, the Hans days of Rolex, proving that you could keep accurate time while playing golf or tennis was a really key marketing message because you’ve got the shocks impacting the wrist of hitting the balls all the time.
Ben: Think about that hairspring, think about that delicate balance wheel floating there, carefully ticking back and forth, hovering the vibrations. I don’t really understand how it keeps working perfectly.
David: Totally. It’s also the type of sport where you can be an elite, top of the world player for a very, very long time as opposed to other sports. Think about Federer’s career, think about Arnold Palmer’s career, Jack Nicklaus. These people had multiple decades of dominance being at the pinnacle of human achievement.
Ben: That’s right.
David: That wraps up the iconic tool, sport, professional watches.
Ben: No, it doesn’t. There’s a thing you haven’t said.
David: Except for the model that both of us are wearing on our wrists right now. The Daytona really created a market in and of its own.
Ben: And completely changed the mechanical watch market, period.
David: The Daytona, through a complete accident of history, as we shall see in a minute here…
Ben: Created a phenomenon.
David: Created the modern watch collector market. And all of the crazy prices, auctions, and insanity that occurs today, (I think) you can say really is all because of the Daytona.
Ben: It’s one component of it, David. I don’t want you to oversell. I’ve got a lot.
David: Okay. At least from the Rolex side of things, the Daytona is what created all of it. BOkay, so David, the Rolex Daytona.
Ben: Okay, so David, the Rolex Daytona.
David: Ooh, yes. The instant worldwide sensation. Or not. The Daytona, unlike all of Rolex’s other watches, is a chronograph, or as they call it a cosmograph.
Ben: Because again, this is Rolex.
David: We can’t use industry standard terms. What is a chronograph? A chronograph is a very fancy term for a stopwatch.
Ben: However complicated you thought a regular mechanical watch was, now add in something like the Daytona, where you also have a full seconds hand on the main dial that counts seconds and then another dial to count minutes, and then another dial to count hours, all in addition to the regular watch function.
David: There are four dials on the watch face of the Daytona. Incredible. Now it turns out, Rolex has actually made a chronograph for a very long time. This was the first tool watch that they introduced way back before World War II, before André Heiniger, before anybody was thinking about this stuff.
Ben: And in large part it looked like this, but there was no craze around it.
David: So in 1962, Rolex becomes the official timekeeper of the then relatively new Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach, Florida. To commemorate this great moment, the next year in 1963, Rolex officially starts calling their chronographs, which again, they’ve been making for three decades at this point, Daytonas.
Ben: They thought about Le Mans because they were also very closely involved with Le Mans, the race in France. But to the name Rolex, this has to have international appeal and can’t have silent letters that Americans can’t pronounce. What’s better than Daytona? I can look at the word. I can say it out loud.
David: And again, like we’ve been talking about, the market is America post-World War II. And what could be more American glamor in 1962 than Daytona Speedway, fast cars, movie stars.
Ben: Twenty-four-hour race.
David: Beaches. Yeah, 24-hour race. It’s perfect. Then a couple of years later, one of the true leading men actors of the day, Paul Newman, stars in a 1969 film called Winning, about being a race car driver. After he stars in the movie, well, guess what? He develops a hobby of becoming an actual race car driver.
His equally famous wife, the actress Joanne Woodward, gifts him with a Rolex Daytona of his very own for his racing activities with the immortal inscription on the back, “Drive carefully–Me.” Again, we’ve been talking romance, lifestyle development.
Ben: Iconic.
David: You can’t get any more iconic than that. It’s perfect. You can totally see how this would set off an absolute insane craze in the market.
Ben: Except, to your point, it doesn’t right away.
David: Except it doesn’t. There are so many of these moments in Rolex history, really in all the stories we tell, where the company does everything in their power to align the stars perfectly and it doesn’t work. But then a butterfly flaps its wings several years later and all of a sudden it does.
Ben: Say in Italy.
David: So 1969 is when Paul Newman stars in this movie. It’s some time in the next year or so after that, when Joanne gives him this watch. Paul Newman absolutely is iconic at this point in time. He’s being photographed all over the world. He’s a leading style figure. He’s in magazines and this is his watch. He’s wearing this watch, and he wears it for about 10–15 years or so.
Then one day in 1984, so long, long, long time later, lots of history passes, which we will come back to, his daughter Nell has her boyfriend over. Paul asks the daughter’s boyfriend, does he know what time it is? And the boyfriend replies, I don’t know. I don’t have a watch. Paul on a whim says, here, take this one. It keeps good time, and gives the boyfriend the watch, the Paul Newman Daytona.
Ben: I actually didn’t know this story.
David: Swear to God this is true.
Ben: This watch sold at auction for the most money, ever.
David: Ever. I think it was $17.5 million.
Ben: Here, take this one. It keeps good time.
David: And at the time the market such as it existed for Daytonas, the secondary market for Daytonas was like a $200 watch. Hey, I like the boyfriend. Sure, have a watch. I’m done with it. Man, to have been the boyfriend. Because two short-termyears later in 1986, for whatever reason it is unknown, a bunch of dealers in Italy starts snatching up versions of the Daytona from the era when Paul Newman’s Daytona was made.
Ben: And it’s important to say here, in Italy there is a real watch culture. This is true in various parts of Europe at this point in time, in a way that in America there’s actually not watch culture. They want to market to Americans. There’s all this rising wealth, people want to celebrate their successes and all that and they’re trying. But America doesn’t have a watch culture the way that Italy had both a collecting culture and a style culture.
David: Which is why there are secondary market dealers in Italy. One rumor is that around this time in the early 1980s, Paul Newman had been on the cover of an Italian style magazine wearing the watch, obviously taken before he gave it to the boyfriend. Maybe that was the reason that people in Italy decided this is a cool watch. Nobody really knows and nobody has ever been able to locate that magazine cover, so who knows?
Well for whatever reason, a butterfly flapped its wings and Italians thought that the watch was cool. So the dealers start buying up the “Paul Newman style” Daytona, which is a specific style, was made for a couple of years by Rolex in the late-1960s, early-1970s. It had an art deco style face to it.
Ben: And a very particular color scheme that featured red around the edges as well.
David: Red around the edges, around the track where the minutes and seconds are kept, but also very specific font.
Ben: Also, we should say, we haven’t said yet that on the Daytona and really all chronographs, there’s a very cool feature which is around the edge. This gives the watch its signature design. There is units per hour. I don't know if it’s logarithmic, but maybe I should work out the equation in my head. Maybe it is logarithmic. It starts at, on the version I’m wearing 400 and goes all the way down to 60.
What that means is if you press start and you drive one mile and then you press the same button again to stop wherever the secondhand is pointed around the edge of the watch was your miles per hour for that one mile that you drove.
If I was able to drive one mile in one minute, then it’s going to come all the way around and it’s going to be pointed all the way up to the top and it’s going to say 60. But it goes up to 400 because of race car drivers.
David: That’s awesome. I actually did not know that that’s what those numbers—
Ben: No, you got to be kidding me. You own this watch.
David: I know. Well I haven’t thought about this watch in 15 years.
Ben: For anyone who’s trying to figure out what’s going on over in David land, David used to work in investment banking, and this was a part of the uniform when you got out of college.
David: Well, here’s the whole story. My dad is big into watches, has been for a long time starting probably when I was in high school and college. He got really big into watches and watch collecting, so early before the market here in America.
Ben: That’s before it took off in any way in the US.
David: Totally. And I thought he was insane. I was like, why are you blowing all this money on watches?
Ben: Which back then it actually wasn’t that much money.
David: Regardless. I graduated, I go to work in investment banking, and back then and I’m sure still to this day, investment banking had a watch culture. My dad gave me a couple of watches to wear, one of which was this stainless white face Rolex Daytona, which is an incredible piece. It was an incredible gift back then. I was like, oh, this is super cool. All my colleagues, especially the senior bankers were like, who is this freaking kid?
Ben: That this is not a, I got my first bonus, so I went and bought a Rolex. This was an it watch.
David: This is not an analyst watch. I don’t know if it was necessarily a managing director watch, but it was probably something that like if you made VP you would go get something like this. It was odd for me to wear it and paradoxically it actually killed my interest in watches and desire to wear them because I realized it was weird for me to wear this watch. Then I was like, you know what? I need to just stop. Especially when I got to the west coast, I was like, I should just not wear watches. This is too much.
Ben: I need to get my bearings again.
David: Exactly. Then I didn’t wear watches at all, nothing on my wrist until the Apple Watch. Then when the Apple Watch came out, I’ve worn that every day since until we went to Taiwan. We were like, well, we should do a little Easter egg, and we broke out the watches out of the safe.
Ben: So cool.
David: The question going forward is, listeners, if you’re listening to this a few months, years in the future, the question will be, do I keep wearing this? Do I go back to the Apple Watch? What do we do? I don’t know.
Ben: We’ll see. But what you’re foreshadowing here, though, is the hype over that Paul Newman dial.
David: Which, to be clear, I’m not wearing a Paul Newman dial.
Ben: Trickled out into the rest of the Daytonas. It made any Daytona extremely desirable.
David: Just sticking with the Paul Newman models here in 1986. Prices for some of these models shoot to $30,000-plus.
Ben: In 1980, $6.
David: Yeah, for a watch that Paul Newman gave away to his daughter’s boyfriend two years before and was worth $200. Ben, you’re right. This one event didn’t create the global watch collecting and investing market period, but it was part of it.
Ben: Absolutely was part of it.
David: This was a huge moment of, oh wow, these things aren’t just purchases. They’re investments and you can trade in them.
Ben: Put a pin in that. There’s a whole world of 1970s and 1980s, that’s this almost parallel universe to Rolex that we’re going to go into here in a minute. Before we do that, it’s worth resuming our history of Rolex advertising.
Concurrent with releasing all of the professional watches, Rolex expanded their aperture in their marketing. It went from just men who guide the destinies of the world wear Rolex to suddenly you’ve got these scuba divers, these pilots, and these race car drivers now at the Daytona, and they’re wearing the professional watches for their craft. We can probably sell a lot of watches by selling that lifestyle.
This is where the expansion goes from just commanding the world to human achievement, those who sit atop their fields. In 1967–1970, there’s this great campaign. They launched the if you were campaign. We’ll put some links in the show notes, but Google this. I’m sure we’ll tweet it, so you can see it on our Twitter account. Big bold Helvetica font. If you were flying the Concord tomorrow, you’d wear a Rolex. Picture of the Concorde going supersonic. Picture of the GMT-Master.
David: So great.
Ben: This is what these pilots at the top of their field are actually wearing. They stayed a million miles away from features and it was all lifestyle advertising. This is the person you would be if you owned this watch. There’s a version speaking at the UN. If you were speaking here tomorrow, you’d wear a Rolex.
David: If you were climbing here tomorrow.
Ben: Yes. Diving down to great depths, taming oilwell wildfires. I think there’s even one where they’re walking in a volcano. It’s just this brilliant campaign that, again, this is the late 1960s. It’s everything we’ve learned from the Mad Men era of advertising, completely the opposite of the Mercedes Gleitze era. We are leaning heavily into who could you be.
I do think this was the very first chip of what made Rolex a real challenger to Omega, who had been the standard big Swiss watch brand. Rolex was really the one to bring lifestyle advertising to bear.
Also, I know I keep harping on this Omega thing. Omega was actually worn by the soldiers in the Boer War that Hans had recognized.
David: So they had the history, too.
Ben: They had the history too, yeah.
David: Those incredible ads, that was really peak Rolex lifestyle era, this second era of Rolex, of moving beyond the product to selling the lifestyle. The Daytona was part of that. Then in the 1980s when the Italian thing happens, the Paul Newman thing happens, and the collector’s market gets built, I think the first real big move that Rolex makes into the luxury world.
Ben: It did create the one model in their lineup where it had real hype around it. That just stayed true for decades. Even in, I don’t know, 2010 or something, you could walk into a jeweler who’s an authorized Rolex dealer and you could just buy something out of the case, which you cannot do today.
David: You could buy a Submariner, you could buy an Explorer, you could buy a GMT-Master, you could buy a Datejust.
Ben: But you couldn’t buy a Daytona. That from this 1980s forward was always this spot in their lineup where, eh, we’ll have to call you about that one.
David: Today, if you want to buy a Rolex of any model, you go in and you put your name on the waitlist. Then at some point in time—could be a couple of months, could be a couple of years—you’ll get the call that your model is available. The Daytona is (I think) the only model where there is no waitlist.
Ben: I don’t think that’s true.
David: Is that not true?
Ben: It’s impossible to say that because they work through authorized dealers, so it’s not up to Rolex. And it varies greatly dealer to dealer. I think they’re actually called Rolex retailers now. They changed it from authorized dealer, but it’s whatever the local dealer’s policy is.
David: Interesting.
Ben: At least historically. It might be changing amidst the insanity right now.
David: If you go browse the forums, the lingo that I read is the Daytona is not a waitlist. It’s a wishlist.
Ben: It’s awesome.
David: Like most of the other models, if you want one and if you get on a list at an authorized dealer, at some point in time your turn will come up. Whereas with a Daytona, it’s like, yeah, you can express desire.
Ben: I have a few things to say on this, but let’s wait till we get to the present day. We have the entire watch industry is going to fall apart and then get rebuilt from scratch. We have that in between where we currently are and where we’ll end up.
David: All right, let’s go there.
Ben: All right.
David: Take us back.
Ben: This was a whole side quest that I did this episode.
David: Nice term. Look at us getting all Gen Z.
Ben: David and I interpreted the assignment differently.
David: Okay. Well you were just pandering to Gen Z right now.
Ben: Do an episode on, how would I…?
David: A side quest interpreting the assignment.
Ben: I’m sorry. Is this Gen Z lingo? I don’t even know.
David: I’m pretty sure it is.
Ben: Oh. Anyway, we interpreted the assignment differently of do an episode on Rolex. David viewed it as go as deep as possible on the entire history of the brand itself, the company, the relationship with Aegler, and each of the watch models. I heard it as go fully understand the entire watch industry and contextualize Rolex’s role within it.
Here it goes. Here’s my best David Rosenthal impression for the quartz crisis. And I have two huge thank yous for this section. Ben Clymer, the founder and CEO of Hodinkee. I spent hours pestering Ben and having phone calls with him. I probably read 30 things on Hodinkee. On the modern watch era, it’s the definitive place to read about watch culture.
Secondly to Joe Thompson. Joe is the journalist in the industry. Most recently, he’s the executive editor of Hodinkee. But over the last 40 years he has written all the canonical pieces. He was the editor of WatchTime magazine. He’s one of the only people ever to get an interview with a sitting Rolex CEO. He lived the quartz crisis firsthand, and was flying around to Geneva, Taiwan, and Japan, and reporting on it live.
David: You’ve mentioned the quartz crisis, also known as the quartz revolution. What is this?
Ben: All right. Here we are in the early 1970s. The Swiss are riding high. They’re the undisputed champs of watchmaking. That’s where we left our heroes here. At one point, the Swiss actually made up as much as 85% of the world’s total wristwatches. Eighty-five percent of the market they had, this is in 1945. It’s right after the war.
David: The analogy here is like TSMC in Taiwan. Making mechanical wristwatches is an extremely difficult specialized skill.
Ben: They made 19 million of the total 21 and a half million that year. Another thing to contextualize it, because you can understand what is coming and how technology disruption will happen, this 19 million watches produced was by 2500 individual companies, 90% of which employed fewer than 50 people.
David: Wow.
Ben: Completely decentralized means of production. In many ways, actually the Taiwan metaphor totally extends. It’s like Switzerland was Hsinchu Science Park, and these places all needed together and collaborate.
David: I was going to say the exact same thing.
Ben: This is an industry built on skilled labor, fragmented across a ton of suppliers, very little of vertical integration. Someone makes the movement, someone makes the hand, someone makes the case, and all this happens in one of the most expensive labor environments in the world.
David: Geneva isn’t cheap.
Ben: It’s amazing that there was this labor-intensive industry in Geneva. All right, so that was 1945. Three decades later in 1973, it’s still going strong. The Swiss peaked at almost 90 million watches made in 1973.
David: Wow.
Ben: Up from 19 million 28 years before. They’re now at 90 million watches, handmade, in this crazy production process per year. We keep alluding to this quartz crisis, but the quartz was not the first revolutionary new technology that was supposed to disrupt mechanical watches. There was a half step along the way to a technology that turned out to be a detour that actually wasn’t the future. David, do you know what that is?
David: Oh, I would guess digital timekeeping, but…
Ben: That’s quartz, yeah. What else vibrates like a quartz crystal? What do you think could oscillate to keep time?
David: Something radioactive?
Ben: A tuning fork.
David: Ah.
Ben: That’s a great weird thing in history. Part of this also comes from Mark Bridges’ great research paper. The whole Swiss watch industry had been marketing that you can judge the quality of a watch by its timekeeping, and then suddenly this tuning fork watch comes out. They’re no longer the best at timekeeping. Mechanical watches are worse than the tuning fork watch.
There’s this crazy watch that comes out, the Bulova Accutron. In practice, though, the Accutron wasn’t a disruptive technology. In the Clayton Christensen term, it was a sustaining innovation. It took the existing thing and made it a little bit better. The watch is still required though hundreds of components and handmade craftsmanship in order to make it.
David: It’s still difficult to make.
Ben: Right. This meant that the existing companies would’ve to integrate into their own workflow to produce it, but there really wasn’t a wide open window for some new entrant to use it as a disruptive force. That’s the thing that you need is can a new producer come in and take a radically simpler approach?
David: Like (say) a Japanese company.
Ben: Right. So quartz. Well, we all think, oh, quartz comes from Japan and Seiko. Then that was this huge disruption of the Swiss watch industry. People had been exploring quartz technology for a very long time. In fact, the first quartz clock was created all the way back in 1927. Do you know where, David?
David: Well I know the Swiss themselves were doing big industry-wide consortiums.
Ben: Correct, but that was in the 1960s and 1970s. In 1927, who possibly could be doing research with quartz technology to use for timekeeping?
David: I have no idea.
Ben: It’s in America. Cutting edge technology research.
David: Bell Labs.
Ben: Bell Labs.
David: Yeah, okay. There we go.
Ben: In New Jersey, the first quartz clock is created.
David: Wow.
Ben: Now unfortunately, in 1927, the Bell Labs quartz clock was the size of an entire room.
David: The ENIAC of clocks.
Ben: Yes. Okay, we’ve been describing the quartz crisis. What is it? How does it actually work? How do quartz watches function? Instead of a main spring that you have in a mechanical watch, you have a battery. Pretty straightforward. Instead of an escapement, you vibrate the quartz crystal.
Quartz has this crazy thing where if you apply an electrical current and it’s shaped a certain way, they can vibrate at exactly 32,768 hertz.
David: That’s right. I remember seeing that number.
Ben: It is weird. This is called the piezoelectric effect. interestingly, that was discovered all the way back in 1880 in Paris.
David: Wow.
Ben: The other important thing you need to know about a quartz watch is it requires an integrated circuit. The modern quartz watch is dependent on using an IC to count the quartz vibrations and transform them from 32,768 hertz to 1 hertz to tick one second at a time. Or if you’re using a digital watch to increment the seconds by one each time.
David: So by the time you get to the early 1970s, you’ve now got integrated circuits.
Ben: That’s exactly right. The first quartz watch that hit the market in 1969 from Seiko was dependent on the invention and miniaturization of the transistor and integrated circuit before it could actually happen. That’s why we’re stuck waiting from the 1920s all the way to 1969 before it can be used in a watch.
David: So really the whole thing is Bell Labs.
Ben: Exactly right. And everything we’ve talked about so far is a manufacturing story, it’s a craft story, it’s an apprenticeship story. This is a technology story. Amazingly, as you pointed out, the Swiss did see this coming. Just like how Kodak famously invented digital photography in their lab, the Swiss saw what happened with the tuning fork, and they wanted to be ready.
So in 1967, two years before the Japanese debut of the Seiko Astron, there was a quartz chronometer in a lab at CEH, which is Switzerland’s electronics watch laboratory, that was twice as accurate as a mechanical watch. They just didn’t actually have an impetus to be first to market. This is really dangerous for our industry. We’ve made it.
David: Let’s keep this in the lab.
Ben: So over to Japan, the Seiko Astron is launched in 1969. You would not have guessed it was going to disrupt the whole industry. It cost as much as a new car, and it wasn’t more accurate. It could be off by up to five seconds a day. What’s the big deal?
David: But just like semiconductors, they get on the learning curve.
Ben: That’s exactly right. It’s a technology story. It’s based on semiconductors. The price value curve that it would follow actually looked a lot more like the early PC from the Microsoft episode we did. The fact that it’s in watches, because that’s the consumer need that’s being filled, actually isn’t relevant for predicting how much better it’s going to get. You should be looking at the technology.
The quartz watch starts at this Toyota Corolla price point, comes down in price 1000x. It used way fewer parts and required very little know-how to assemble it. You could invest upfront in machinery and have very, very, very low variable costs and labor costs. For the first time in watchmaking, you had economies of scale and operating leverage. It was a technology product in an artisan market. This whole thing, once it gets going, happens so fast.
David: And in the early days, the Swiss industry and a lot of makers, including Rolex, released their own quartz models too.
Ben: Hold onto that for a second. Here’s how the quartz revolution went, and the Japanese think of it as the quartz revolution. The Swiss think of it as the quartz crisis. By the end of the 1970s, you could get a quartz watch for cheaper than a mechanical watch. It was more accurate.
Here in 1979, mechanical watches are for the vast majority of scenarios, functionally obsolete. Unless you are an astronaut or a pilot or an adventurer who prefers a spring over a battery that could die, there is no practical reason to ever buy a mechanical watch again.
David: And the Olympics are being timed with quartz timepieces.
Ben: And interestingly, Omega quartz at the Olympics.
David: Interesting.
Ben: But obviously, this is not the end of our story, and mechanical watches would go on to be a better business than ever 50 years later. Very different, but much greater in revenue than ever before. There’s this wild thing that our beautiful mechanical watch hero protagonist here is now obsolete functionally.
There were a few iterations of how this went. The American firms tried to make quartz watches with LED technology. The Hamilton Pulsar came out in 1972. These were really cool and you look at them, but in the long run they were a complete failure.
You had to push a button to turn the LED on. It actually took both hands to read the time. One to wear the watch, one to push the button. Some companies followed into the market starting in 1974 and will be very familiar to Acquired listeners. National Semiconductor, Fairchild Semiconductor.
David: TI got into this market too. Yeah. There we go.
Ben: Yup. Then came the stampede. Commodore. Intel, HP, Hughes Aircraft dozens of companies flooded in.
David: Hughes Aircraft getting into the market. Wow.
Ben: These companies made integrated circuits, so they thought, well, we can make consumer products around them too because we make the internals. But (a) they weren’t great at building brands. These were all B2B companies. And (b) they were horribly commoditized. This market immediately became commodity, had no barrier to entry, and all the profits immediately got arbitraged out. LED failure.
The next step is two-fold. One quartz movements powering analog watch faces. This has started with the Seiko Astron. This was the thing that the Japanese did first in 1969. The other branch, which every listener will know well, is digital LCD watches with liquid crystal displays that ended up being vastly superior to LEDs since they were always on. These also worked on a quartz movement. Seiko, Citizen, and later Casio were extremely successful for a time making these out of Japan.
Hong Kong becomes the powerhouse for inexpensive manufacturing of all of this, along with Taiwan, South Korea, and mainland China. Think about this. 1969 the Seiko Astron launches. 1975 is when the Swiss are going, oh crap, then within four years it’s over. Quartz completely ran the table.
By 1980, Hong Kong was already exporting 126 million watches a year, half of which were digital. Switzerland at peak made 90 million. Then boom, a few years in, Hong Kong has 126 million.
By 1981, the next year, Japanese watch exports surpass Switzerland. Seiko actually was great at brand building, advertising, messaging in a way that the American B2B semiconductor firms were horrible at. Then 1985, just four years after Japan meets Switzerland, Japan’s exports are 3x Switzerland.
David: Wow. The absolutely incredible thing is now that you all know this, this is the backdrop that the Paul Newman craze happens.
Ben: The Swiss market’s global share would fall from that 85% at peak in 1945 to just 15% by 1980. The number of firms fell from 2000 companies in 1960 to fewer than 500 in 1980. Just absolutely destroyed. Quartz output accounted for only 3% of units in 1975. By 1979, 31% of new watches were quartz-powered.
From 1975 to 1981–1982, you just have a complete running of the table. At least for the old reason of why you would buy a mechanical watch, there is zero reason to buy that anymore. Zero.
David: This is massively impacting the entire Swiss economy, right?
Ben: Yeah, extinction event for this huge industry for them. There’s a whole separate story about the founding of Swatch Group and how many of the Swiss brands were rolled together, or a bunch of them went bankrupt, or they got sold off to conglomerates.
But interestingly, Rolex was independent. They were owned by a foundation. They had no shareholders. They also managed to resist joining the Swiss cartel that was all colluding on what’s our national strategy here. They could do their own thing. They watched, this certainly happened, they had a lot of fear around it, but they weren’t as caught up as the rest of the Switzerland companies that were all super, super dependent on each other.
The whole watch world by volume became almost entirely quartz. The market for time telling as a function went entirely to quartz, full stop. But a new massive market emerged that had been lurking in basically niche auctions, which was watch aficionados who valued pieces for their complexity, their artistry, and their rarity.
Rolex figured out how to build this enormous, bigger than ever before business in this completely new market (a) of enthusiasts who drive the excitement, that’s the auction house world, but then (b) in this lifestyle aura of success.
David: This is where we told it as part of the Daytona story, because that’s where it belongs. But the Italian affair, the Paul Newman affair is the luckiest thing that ever happened to Rolex because this gave them the golden opportunity to do that.
Ben: This is finally clicked in my head. It’s not that the mechanical watch made a comeback, it’s that there was an entirely new market that it turned out to be the perfect thing for after their initial market got wrecked.
David: I think there’s also another level of nuance here too. Rolex was better positioned than most of the other Swiss companies because they had already transitioned to lifestyle. However, that would not have been enough.
Eventually, Seiko and Citizen were also going to transition to lifestyle companies, and that in and of itself, what wearing your watch says about you isn’t defensible in the long run against technology disruption. Wearing an Apple Watch. What model, what style, what band says a lot about you too. I wear my Hermès band on my Apple Watch. That says a lot about me.
But what is defensible is a luxury strategy. A luxury strategy expands to managing the entire market and overall brand management. It’s managing the secondary market and supply on it. It’s doing things like, oh, the Paul Newman craze is happening. Let’s pull the model from the market. It’s vertically integrating to ensure absolute product consistency.
It’s instituting waitlists. It’s killing or pausing your most successful products. It’s not changing your price in response to demand shifts. A purely lifestyle company wouldn’t do all of those things. Remember Fossil, the US watch company that is now basically bankrupt? They were a lifestyle watch company, but they were not a luxury company.
Ben: Yeah. That was the fashion watch craze where the quartz technology enabled a whole wave of $25 watches where you could own five, six, seven of them, and wear with different outfits. That was an interesting market for 20 years before technology obsoleted that one too with the smartwatch.
Interestingly, do you know what Swatch stands for?
David: I always thought Swiss watch group, but…
Ben: That’s the common perception of it. It’s second watch. These watches are so cheap. You can have a second one.
David: Exactly. There you go. That is a perfectly viable lifestyle strategy. These watches are so cheap, you can have a second one and each one says something different.
Ben: It’s a fashion strategy, but it’s not a luxury strategy, and it’s still subject to a functional displacement like what happened with the Apple Watch.
David: Totally.
Ben: Okay. We’re at this complete demise of Switzerland here. We’re thinking about how it could get better in the future. But there’s a whole parallel story, which is the renaissance of mechanical watches. How they come to fill this new market, to be this perfect product for a new market.
Okay, a thing that I had a hard time figuring out until really the end of our research process, how did Rolex respond to the quartz crisis?
David: We knew that there was this transition that happened to luxury, and it was in response to the quartz crisis. But you go read all the stuff that’s out there and nobody actually chronicles this.
Ben: No one connects the dots. They talk about quartz crisis, creation of Swatch group, saving what’s left of the Swiss watch industry. And then separately, they talk about Rolex through the years, building the lifestyle, brand, all the race car stuff, and the advertising. But Rolex was in Switzerland during the quartz crisis. Connect these dots please.
David: And the end of the story—spoiler alert—is Rolex is doing probably $10-plus billion in annual revenue, way, way more than any other company in this space.
Ben: Dude, Rolex is 30% of the revenue in the entire Swiss watch industry. It’s insane.
David: So there’s a lesson here.
Ben: In part, the lesson is it is incorrect to describe markets by the products in them. You should describe markets by the job to be done. The market of risk-based time telling was no longer available to the Swiss. It entirely went quartz. But there was a market for something different that the Swiss were great at if they were set up and positioned correctly, and managed correctly.
I think that’s the lesson here. This isn’t the high-end of the watch industry and the low-end of the watch industry. These are two completely different customer needs.
David: Totally different things. There’s an arc to this story. Rolex sits back, they see what not to do, they see what to do, and then they do it.
Ben: Here’s my attempt at chronicling what happened, and I would love feedback from watch nerds if there’s anything that I missed here. But this is how it seemed to be after reading five books, talking to Joe, talking to Ben, talking to all sorts of friends in and around the industry.
There are three concurrent stories here, none of which are Rolexes. There’s the Omega story, then there’s an unlikely corner of Swiss watchmaking with Blancpain, and then there’s the auction houses. Once you get those, you then get the Rolex story.
First is Omega. They blew a lead in the ninth inning. That’s the only way to put it.
David: As you being my foil throughout the episode here being like, actually David, Omega was also big, maybe bigger than Rolex the whole time.
Ben: Totally. Coming into the 1970s, they just had their watch land on the moon in Apollo 11. They’re the sponsor of the Olympics. They’re an iconic brand. Incredibly—Joe Thompson tipped me off to this—in a study conducted by Gallup in 1978, they asked the question, have you heard of Rolex? Eight out of 10 Americans in 1978 answered no.
David: Wow.
Ben: Less than 20 years later, 8 out of 10 said yes. Rolex did something incredibly right between 1978 and 1998 to go from 20% brand awareness to 80% brand awareness.
Over to Omega. As late as 1977 in the quartz crisis, omega is still the third largest watch brand in the world behind Seiko, the darling of the quartz revolution, and Timex, which was the volume player on the American side of quartz. In many ways they should have been Switzerland’s most likely horse to ride this thing out. But they reacted extremely poorly.
What did they do first? A whole bunch of models. What did they do decond? Go heavy into quartz. What they do third? Throw the kitchen sink at strategy. Just make a bunch of models, bunch to price points, really diluted the brand. They licensed the brand out to other companies.
From afar, this just looks like panic. Instead of thinking what are we uniquely best at in the world and trying to lean into that, Omega thought this quartz thing is absolutely essential to get right. It’s the future, so we have to switch all of our production to it.
This is essentially what the whole Swiss industry did. They either fell into this trap where they went bankrupt or got rolled up. Breitling, Heuer, you name it. The only issue that the big glaring one here in hindsight is that quartz required a completely different set of competencies to do it well. A totally different culture, a totally different headcount, and a totally different cost structure.
David: Like you’re saying earlier, quartz is a fixed cost, it’s a technology business with fixed cost leverage. Swiss mechanical watchmaking is a variable cost business.
Ben: They happen to both tell time, but the means of how they tell time, the two types of companies that you need to build to get there are entirely different. They shouldn’t resemble each other at all.
The other thing that killed them is that they had these agencies locally. Omega would import their movements, and then the agency could design their own case to suit the local market.
David: Interesting. There weren’t international standardized models.
Ben: To build brand around.
David: Interesting, yeah. That is a major luxury no-No. A Birkin is a Birkin, people.
Ben: Exactly. Rolex by this point, the late 1970s, are importing whole watches, they’ve got their core 6–7 watches that people really find iconic, and they’re leading into this idea that you need one single global brand and product line.
David: It’s so funny. If you look at some of the really enthusiast-type historians out there, they bemoaned that Rolex stopped innovating after the golden era in the 1950s where they introduced all the sport watches. It’s like, no, no. That’s the point. They got the core product lineup set, and then they rode that horse.
Ben: Once you create the Porsche 911, you should just tweak the Porsche 911 once every 7–8 years. That way, you can buy a 911 just like your grandfather bought a 911. That (I think) is a huge piece of what Rolex got right that a lot of other people got wrong.
To close the Omega story—this is crazy—it’s the company that governments and militaries wanted to work with. It’s the company that Rolex was trying to beat with all their innovative ads and positioning. This is the first company to ever launch a dive watch before the Submariner. They rushed into here’s how we fight the quartz crisis head on when they were just not built to be a part of that at all. This is the place where we see the divide where Rolex becomes Rolex and Omega make cool watches but it’s not the brand.
David: They pay a lot of money to MGM to be in James Bond movies.
Ben: So that’s Rolex sitting on their hands, watching Omega and going, okay, don’t do that. But of course Rolex had the cash to do it. Rolex is a privately owned, very successful, very wealthy company, where they could take two or three years and see how it plays out. If your ownership structure is different or you have debt or you’re not as profitable, you don’t have that luxury. You don’t have the margin of safety to do that.
Chapter two, a guy named Jean-Claude Biver, he’s an exec at Omega of all places, resigns out of frustration. This thing sucks. They’re so timid.
David: He’s the Morris Chang of Omega.
Ben: Exactly. So in 1983, Biver buys Blancpain, which was popular in the 1950s, but had disappeared. He buys it with this idea that I’m going to resurrect this thing as a mechanical-only luxury brand.
That’s not the way that the rest of Switzerland was thinking. They were thinking, how do we take our big, bloated, old world companies and ride it out in this tech transition? He’s like, I’m just going to buy the brand. The goal is to do limited production handcrafted watches, and the scarcity and the high cost to make them will lead to these high prices. He picked up this brand again because everyone’s panicking for nothing. Inflation adjusted (I think) is like $16,000.
David: This is like the Bernard Arnault story buying Louis Vuitton out of Busack.
Ben: That’s exactly right. He would go on to sell it a decade later for 60 million Swiss francs.
David: Nice. Which back then, that was real money.
Ben: Yeah. So Biver comes up with this advertising slogan, marketing genius, to describe the essence of the brand. It’s an old brand he bought. Here’s the slogan. “Since 1735, there has never been a quartz Blancpain watch, and there never will be.” It’s a great slogan because quartz is 13–14 years old, but he invokes 1735. For the first few hundred years it was impossible to have a quartz Blancpain watch.
David: Perfect.
Ben: The idea is if you want to buy a commonplace machine-made quartz watch, go right ahead. But if you value traditional craftsmanship, you buy a Blancpain. We are selling champagne and caviar, and they’re selling calculators over there.
David: Rolex is watching this all play out and they’re like, oh, that’s the playbook.
Ben: Yes. Joe Thompson has this great quote that it was a feat of jujutsu to take the weakness of the mechanical watch, the old technology, inaccurate, labor-intensive, expensive to produce, and turn them into strengths. Old world craftsmanship, supported by these artisans in accord with 400 year old traditions to make these rare, expensive masterpieces.
Blancpain and Biver should get a lot of credit for this move, but in practice they had nothing to lose. It’s a fun Hail Mary to try this approach. I don’t even think Biver could have predicted how well this strategy would end up working for Rolex. I think this was a fun demonstration. Okay. Blancpain, the right strategy, at small scale, with nothing to lose.
Chapter three, auction houses. The mechanical watch Renaissance really came first from auction houses. If you think about what auctions do, they value things that are rare. For a long time, this meant vintage pieces. Old things mostly fall apart. That means the ones that are surviving, we can pay a lot of money for them.
Well, mechanical watches, even the new ones are becoming rare. The whole market’s going away. Companies are going out of business. You’ve got these few extremely high-end producers like Patek Philippe that could fetch more than ever at auctions even new. Patek is the poster child for this. They came out with this thing called the Caliber 89. Have you heard of this watch?
David: I am very familiar with Patek, but I have not heard of this watch.
Ben: This thing, you’re not wearing it on your wrist. It is multiple pounds in weight. You hold it with two hands. It’s the most complicated watch ever made. They required computer-aided design to manufacture it.
The strategy in 1979 internally at Patek, was for our big anniversary celebration in 10 years—so in 1979–1989—we want to make the most complicated watch ever made. It was something like 30 complications. This thing made people go nuts. At an auction house it sold for over $3 million. Landmark high.
It gets mentioned on Saturday Night Live in a skit for who would pay $3 million for a watch. Completely high watermark, completely kicks off this new craze of complication makers. People see it and they think, oh, I have to add as many complications as possible to my watch. They got a little goofy. Interestingly, Rolex never participated in that.
David: No. Again, they do their own thing.
Ben: And they want to make best engineered, extremely functional, extremely reliable, not the most flare, not the most artistic, not the most any of that. It is the 911 that you could have bought 30 years ago is the 911 that you have today, but the one today is better engineered.
This auction house story from 1977 to 1985 is essentially the only interesting part of the mechanical watch world. Then it sparks the idea that hey, new mechanical watches, especially these crazy complication ones can be really interesting too. Right around 1985, that’s the same time that the Paul Newman dial goes nuts in Italy. I really think a huge piece of this story is that the auction house market sparked the interest in the new watches.
David: It totally, totally did.
Ben: Like highlighted rarity.
David: Yup.
Ben: Okay. we’ve got Omega what not to do. We’ve got Blancpain, what to do at small scale with nothing to lose. We’ve got the auction houses taking the used market, for lack of a better term, and sparking the new market. What’s Rolex doing? Well at first they explored quartz like everyone else, but very carefully.
David: The Oysterquartz.
Ben: The Oysterquartz.
David: It feels profane to even say that.
Ben: I want one. I actually think they look extremely cool. They’re very angular. They’ve got this integrated band into the watch face. I quite like it. They poured a huge amount of R&D into quartz watches, but they didn’t productize most of it.
They did these small runs of this Oysterquartz, which it was a very Rolexy way to do quartz that a lot of people have called over-engineered. But they pretty quickly got to this idea that if they wanted to lean into mechanical as a differentiation, even though it was a worst timekeeper and emphasized brand lifestyle, the incredibly complex thing that was going on in the mechanical watch process, they should just lean into that and the romance of it. Quartz just violated their ability to tell that story.
There’s a great passage in the book Electrifying the Wristwatch, which is Lucien Trueb’s book. It says, “André Heiniger was a true visionary. His opinion was that the originally very costly quartz would soon be banal. This had already happened with transistor radios, TV sets, and pocket calculators.
Top quality mechanical movements would always remain expensive and exclusive due to the large amount of highly qualified labor required for manufacturing these parts and assembling them. The inescapable fact that a mechanical device can only tell time approximately could easily be hidden by writing ‘superlative chronometer officially certified’ on the dial. Wealthy people don’t need an instrument that tells time. They want a beautiful and exclusive object on their wrist.”
David: It’s amazing. It’s like this full circle moment back to the original wristwatch market, which was as ladies jewelry, where part of the signifying aspect of it was, I don’t care about the accurateness of the time. I care about its beauty and what it says about me.
Ben: That’s exactly right. The thing I was trying to dig on this is, was this a risk that Rolex took? Was it counterintuitive? I asked Joe Thompson about it, and he said, “In the late 1970s, every watch reporter knew one thing. Mechanical watches were doomed. Every company told you that, including all those in Switzerland. It was a tremendously ballsy move to continue emphasizing the mechanical watch.”
David: But they also were like Jensen or Morris were like, well yeah. I bet the company, but I knew I’d be right. They took their time, they waited, they watched what not to do, and then they saw the playbook with Blancpain of what to do, then they hit the gas.
Ben: And they were starting to see what was happening in Italy as you described. The other thing that was making it take off in Italy is the Daytona became part of a uniform. For young men, wearing a bomber jacket and a stainless steel chronograph on your wrist was a look.
David: All right, I need to go get a bomber jacket now. Midlife crisis, here we come.
Ben: But yes, I think your thinking about Jensen is exactly right. I also think Rolex had a built-in hedge because of their independence and because of their cash position. Everybody else is just going to do all the scrambly stuff fast. They’re all super reliant on each other, and they’re all overextended. Rolex is this incredibly conservative company.
David: But we should say another word on that now. In 1944, when Hans’s first wife died, he created the Wilsdorf Foundation. He put all of his ownership into that foundation. Much like the IKEA Foundation that we talked about on that episode, the primary purpose of the Wilsdorf Foundation is to ensure the continued operations of Rolex.
It’s even more ironclad than IKEA, because IKEA is this rat’s nest of all these different structures, and ll these different country foundations that they’re in. Rolex is just one foundation in Switzerland. The most ironclad privacy foundation–friendly laws in the world.
Now the foundation is also a charitable foundation and disperses huge amounts of money, much of it locally there in Geneva. But make no mistake. They’re not responsible for shareholder return, profits. Number one is continued operations of Rolex.
Ben: They can have three bad years in a row, and the CEO might not get fired. And they’re playing a different game. Very emblematic of this, in 1978, right in the middle of the quartz crisis, this is when Omega’s throwing stuff at the wall, they released the Sea-Dweller 4000. More of the same. You know? What should we do? More of the same.
David: Let’s go down to 4000 meters.
Ben: Rolex had this built-in hedge. They would’ve been in great shape if they needed to go quartz. They had the brand, they had developed the technology to do it well.
David: They had the product, Oysterquartz.
Ben: They just hoped it wouldn’t come to that. Also, as we’ve talked about, it would require dramatic change at Rolex if it became a quartz company. They really just wanted to be able to make their six watches.
I think if they had gone quartz, Rolex would be fine today. That would be a way to build a good business. But the way to potentially build a great business was to try this crazy Blancpain-esque strategy, but at scale with one of the biggest and most successful brands in the world.
I think the important thing is they maintained the option to go play the other strategy that Omega was playing if they really needed to, but they just hoped it wouldn’t come to that.
David: And it didn’t.
Ben: Yup. By 1989 it’s extremely clear that their strategy is working. Along with Patek Philippe, they had record sales that year. Record amidst this craziness.
Patek was similar to Rolex in their strategy. They had early exploration into quartz, but they came to the same conclusion. Our company is not going to be good at this, so we either need to die trying, or we need to really lean into this heritage handcrafted craftsmanship thing. But it’s actually an easier decision for them because they’re only making 9000 watches a year at this point. Rolex is making 100,000.
David: It really was, as you say, an incredibly well-managed but ballsy decision on Rolex’s part. Patek also, at least now, I don’t know if it was the case back then, they’re in a very different part of the market than Rolex. They’re in the dress watch complication world.
Ben: Yes. Listeners, we’ve been lying to you this whole episode. Rolex is actually not a luxury company.
David: Oh, interesting. I would totally disagree.
Ben: That is my opinion. It’s arguably not even a craft product. It’s an exceptionally well-made industrial product with exquisite engineering and amazing branding. But the luxury world of watches, it’s Audemars Piguet, it’s Patek Philippe.
These watches sell for 8, 10, 30 times as much as Rolex watches, and they produce way fewer of them. Rolex is an industrial engineered, beautiful, consistent, reliable product. It’s not art or complications or fashion. It’s mass. This thing sells 1,000,001–1,000,002 products a year.
David: I agree with you. I think maybe our definitions of a luxury company are different. If you were to define a luxury company as the most expensive, highest end items, yes totally agree. That is not Rolex. That is Patek, that is some of the other low volume companies.
The reason I think that Rolex is a luxury company extraordinaire is managing the market as opposed to participating in it. To me, that’s what Hermès does better than anybody else out there. They manage the market.
Ben: They’re in control.
David: They’re in control, and Rolex does the same thing.
Ben: Rolex is in control.
David: Rolex is completely in control. They could sell their products for much, much more than they do, and they do not because it is the right long-term decision to do so. There’s a whole bunch of other elements to the luxury strategy that they manage with, which really comes into the next CEO, André Heiniger’s son Patrick, who takes over in 1992.
Ben: And if we look at luxury versus premium, those definitions we used on the LVMH episode, it is absolutely luxury.
David: You’re not buying Rolex for the features. You’re buying Rolex for what it says about you. And they are a high volume luxury player. Again, in comparison to a Patek or Audemars or something like that, yes.
I think the Birkin bag is a really good comp for it because pricewise, they’re actually pretty similar. You can get a Birkin for, I don’t know, $12,000–$15,000. It’s an insane amount of money, but relative to what they could charge or what the secondary market prices are.
Ben: Totally fair. All right. Take us to 1990.
David: So everything we’ve been talking about managing through the quartz crisis and this transition to luxury, the auction houses, the Paul Newman craziness, in 1992 André retires and his only son Patrick takes over as CEO. He had joined in 1986 as commercial director right at the height of the Paul Newman craze and all of this that we’ve been talking about.
What Patrick really did within Rolex was he vertically integrated the company. He presided over, most importantly, the Aegler acquisition in 2004 for rumored roughly a billion Swiss Francs. Rolex buys Aegler and makes it officially in-house.
But the other thing that he did that people talk about, he consolidated all the factories, every physical location where parts that went into Rolex watches were made, whether those were in-house Rolex made or a third party supplier, from (call it) 30 different locations throughout Switzerland down to 4. Four big, massive, consolidated sites where they own and produce everything in-house.
This is super important and all in service of this luxury strategy of brand management. I owe a big thank you to James Dowling, one of the co-authors of The Best of Time, which is a great Rolex history. He’s actually working on a new book that’s going to come out in October, the Rolex Legacy. He helped me understand this.
Ben, what you were talking about a little while back, about what Omega did, where you had the core movement, but then you had different end models, cases, and products in different regions around the world, that is the absolute opposite of what you need to do as a luxury company.
It can’t be like this one’s better than that one, or different levels of quality, or these imperfections here. Absolutely not. That is critically important, because all the clientele that are buying these products are global clientele. They’re comparing it against one another. You can’t sweep this stuff under the rug.
In the watch industry because of Ben, what you are saying, that there was this history of all these fragmented, different, little suppliers who are providing all these different parts to the different end brands, you had a wide variation in quality among products. Patrick said we need to make sure every Submariner that comes in a Rolex box is of uniform quality.
Ben: So he shrinks the suppliers from 27 down to just 4. Rolex bought their bracelet maker, they started forging their own metals in house, gold, steel, you name it. Proprietary stuff beyond just their famous 904L steel. And they brand it.
Rolex nerds all recognize Rolesor, Oystersteel, and Everose. They already had a lot of control over their future from before, from their private ownership, but now they really do because production is also in their own hands.
David: And this also starts to build into the lore just like Hermès has. Oh, we have artisans that we train. We have our own schools, our own pipeline, and there are 8000 people that work in ateliers that we’ve developed in France.
Rolex now has the same thing in these four mega sites. They have their own technology, their own people, their own machines in, when was this, 2015, I think? They invited four bloggers, Ben and James were two of them to come and tour the facilities.
Ben: Ben Clymer has this unbelievable piece on Hodinkee about his experience.
David: You read these pieces, you see the photos, and you hear them talk about all of our machining, all of our tooling we make in-house, custom. And we’ve designed these facilities to be able to fit, like there’s this one giant hallway, and Ben and James are like, why is this hallway so big? Oh, well we designed it so that the width of our biggest machine that we have, we multiplied that by two, so that we can get bigger ones in the future.
It’s all about vertical integration, and this creates that uniformity, that myth, and that uniqueness of what you’re buying when you buy a Submariner, a Daytona.
Ben: It is so true. After I read Ben’s piece, I took a step back and thought, huh. Rolex actually is the highest quality thing. It’s the brand. But who else makes their own machine that is going to open and close the clasp a thousand times in just a few minutes to test it? Who else is forging their own metals? Who else makes all their own movements?
Who else is quietly inventing new components of the watch and then not advertising them because they just wanted to make it a little bit better, even though they kept the reference number the same? They’re going to absurd lengths to make these things the highest quality engineered and produce products in the entire industry or in any other industry too.
David: Totally. That’s the product and production side. That’s the story of Patrick’s time as CEO. In 2008, sadly he develops a health issue and ends up passing away way too young. They transition leadership first to Bruno Meier who had been the CFO, then in 2011 too, Gian Riccardo Marini, who was a 40-year Rolex veteran and had come up through Italy.
Ben: And this is weird to have two new CEOs in short-termsuccession. Over 90 years, they had three CEOs. That speaks to the ethos of small, iterative changes over long periods of time. What other companies had three CEOs in the better part of a century?
David: I think it was just a accident of timing that they then had these two CEOs for relatively short-termtenure and just was because they were older, but they were both long-term Rolex veterans.
What they do together through 2008 and the financial crisis, I think is the other side, the demand side of the equation that cements in my mind, Rolex being a luxury player, is the financial crisis was huge for the watch industry, in a counterintuitive way. I remember I lived through this as a banker on Wall Street, right out of college.
I graduated in 2007, and that first year that I was on Wall Street before the crash was the height of watches. It was borderline okay for me to wear my Daytona because it was good times. But everybody was spending their bonuses on Swiss watches. The craze was on, then the crash happened and all that dried up overnight. Austerity was the name of the day. That really, really hurt a lot of other watch brands who then cut their prices to try and save revenue. Rolex didn’t do that.
Ben: And zeroed out ad spend.
David: Rolex didn’t cut prices, didn’t stop sponsoring the US Open.
Ben: This is another spot where if you’re Rolex, you’re like, well how long is this financial crisis going to last? Five years? What’s five years? It’s probably more like two years. We don’t have shareholders. I don’t need to make my quarter. I don’t need to make next year. We have enough cash cushion that we can ride this thing out. we’re going to make the right 5, 10, 20 years bets. This is all noise.
Interestingly, Rolex actually massively doubled down on their marketing spend in the US during the 2008 financial crisis while everyone else is not only cutting marketing spend, but cutting prices on existing products in stores to move inventory as you said.
The first time I saw this, I was like, who at Rolex? How did they make this decision? How could you possibly make this bet? And then as you start to learn more about it, it’s an obvious move. There’s a secular thing that’s happening, which is the American watch aficionado market. It really wasn’t a thing until the early 2000s, but it was really starting to take off.
David: This is when Ben founded Hodinkee.
Ben: Exactly. Enthusiast blogs, YouTube channels. Not yet in 2008 YouTube channels, but here’s an example. Rolex and other Swiss watch brands used to throw these events to generate interest in their watches. It would be for one person we talked to called them old, fuddy-duddies who would show up, or they would be for Chinese tourists and they would have them in the Chinese language. That’s how small America’s watch aficionado market was in the early 2000s.
By 2006, 2007, 2008, it’s really taking off. It’s just the logical move to double down on this. In retrospect it looks so ballsy, but given Rolex’s unique position versus what everybody else could do, the opportunity’s there for the taking. Advertise hard, go get that new customer.
David: Here’s the thing. This was the easy half of the decision for Rolex was to double down, keep going during and after the great financial crisis. That’s easy. Of course, textbook playbook the thing to do when you’re in a position like Rolex. The hard thing was the watch industry did a hard bounce back up in the next couple of years once the Fed kicked in in response to the financial crisis.
As crazy as things felt in 2007 in the watch market, by the time you get to 2011, 2012, 2013, we’re way beyond that in excesses. Many of the other brands totally did this whiplash see-saw thing, where they were pricing really high, trying to become exclusive before 2008. 2008 hits, they panic, they cut prices, they cut marketing spend.
Now, the market comes roaring back. All of a sudden, they’re raising prices back up again and trying to cash in on the good times. What does Rolex do? They stay the course. Same thing. They don’t raise prices, but they control supply.
Ben: Well, they raise prices slowly every year. It’s a modest price increase every year that sets the floor. Frankly, if they do it over enough decades, everybody just believes forever that these things are going to appreciate because it’s almost like they’re the Fed, and they’re guaranteeing a certain rate of return on these things.
David: There is this really awesome New York Times article in the last couple of months talking about this dynamic, how all the other luxury houses over the past couple of years during the post-COVID craziness, really raised prices and price gouged themselves out of the market once the reset happened.
Hermès didn’t, and Rolex followed this exact playbook over the last 10 years of not price-gauging themselves out of the market, but intentionally limiting supply, letting the secondary market go nuts, and then but keeping an even keel for themselves. Now that there’s been a bit of a reset, they’re stronger than ever I think.
Ben: All right. This is a question I had on my list to ask you. A very, very common narrative about Rolex right now is they have burned all of their biggest fans. These waitlists have gotten out of hand, the authorized dealers are being disrespectful, they are intentionally limiting supply. Have they gone too far in their unavailability?
David: I think it’s a really good point. One dimension where Rolex historically has been very different in their strategy versus Hermès or other luxury companies, is they don’t control the last mile of retail and the customer relationship. They’ve always had the authorized dealer model as we talked about.
Right now, or at least until recent times, these crazy waitlist things are actually somewhat out of Rolex’s control, in a way that Hermès or Louis Vuitton or Chanel or the like, they’re managing their own customer relationships. Rolex doesn’t have their own stores. This was one of my really big questions as I was doing the research, why? It seems obvious. They should have their own stores. This works so well for LVMH, Hermès, and et cetera. Why doesn’t Rolex do this?
Historically, at least, the key difference between Rolex and other luxury houses, is Rolex is a one category company. Hermès can have their own stores because they sell furniture, ready-to-wear, jewelry, and handbags. Even though in any one category, they sell a lot less of a given SKU, like far fewer Birkin bags than Rolex sells watches. The totality of all the products they sell allows them to support a dedicated, owned, and operated retail footprint.
Ben: I don’t buy this.
David: You don’t buy this for a second? Okay. Well I do think this is changing now.
Ben: Rolex has 1500 authorized dealer locations, and if all 1500 of those were Rolex stores, they would absolutely do a great job paying rent. They don’t need to sell a whole bunch of other things to lure people into the store though.
David: Well, I think that’s true now and I think that’s why they bought Bucherer in 2023.
Ben: Oh, okay. All right, let’s have that debate now. Let’s come back to scarcity. Why buy Bucherer?
David: 2023, they spend a rumored $5 billion.
Ben: Five?
David: Yeah, that’s what I read. nobody knows the details of the transaction. But to buy one of, if not their largest single retail partner, the jeweler Bucherer.
Ben: And they have a 100-year-old relationship. This was one of the first retail partners for Rolex in the super early days. Actually, this alliance plus the Aegler alliance helped them stay out of the Swiss cartel. In many ways they have Bucherer to thank for their independence and their freedom while the rest of the industry was panicking. They’ve got this tradition.
But the question is, everybody jumps to, shouldn’t they own their own retail? They own everything else. Shouldn’t they own their own retail? Why? What are the reasons? Well, there’s control over the buying experience, and to your point, list management.
David: As waitlist management becomes more important, I think that becomes more critical.
Ben: That’s legitimate. There’s eking out every dollar of margin and there’s getting full visibility into data on customers, which actually is interesting. They don’t get that today. They don’t have their customer’s email address or names or addresses because that data belongs to the authorized dealer. Rolex doesn’t actually know who’s buying their product or who likes their product, which is crazy for a modern company of this scale and size.
David: Well then, the elephant in the room to me with all this is all these authorized dealers sell other brands too. Bucherer sells Omega.
Ben: And Bucherer uses the fact that they’re a Rolex dealer to attract those other brands, and to attract the customers who will buy a bunch of stuff in the store. Once you have Rolex—someone in the research put it to me—you’re a made man.
David: But historically, Rolex has been like, that’s fine. Sell Patek, sell Audemars, sell Omega in the same physical location. Will that change now?
Ben: Right. Okay, just walk through the logic tree. Rolex mostly didn’t need to take on the burden or the fixed costs or the complexities of owning retail. Rolex dictates terms to retailers on how their products should be sold, displayed, marketed. They have exacting standards, and over time retailers actually have less room to differentiate their own brand and experience.
Increasingly, you walk in and you’re like, oh, is this a Rolex store? And Rolex doesn’t have to take on managing the store. They have 16,000 employees doing $10 billion a year in sales.
David: Amazing.
Ben: This business is so efficient from a headcount perspective, and everybody talks about it like it’s craftsmanship. It’s high economies of scale production. Yeah, there are people working on these things, but there’s a tremendous amount of machines and they don’t have to operate the stores. But they mostly get all the good parts of highly controlled retail experience without having to also be in the very crappy retail business.
Industry-wide, third-party retailers make a 37% gross margin after they mark up from the wholesale price. That’s their margin. For Rolex in particular, it’s lower than average because Rolex, you only get to keep 33%–34%. I’ve heard that actually went down 1% this year.
Rolex gets to have their cake and eat it too by not owning retail stores and having all the benefits of as if they did, at least over the last 30 years or so. I think your points are valid about they are increasingly wanting that customer touchpoint, especially as it comes to things like waitlists.
David: The thing about Rolex in pursuing this strategy until now, at least, they don’t necessarily do things for the gross margins. This is a foundation-owned company. They do things for long-term strategic reasons.
I think if at least you buy the premise that if they were to operate their own retail locations, they would be pushed by customers to have more things in those stores than just the six or seven core Rolex models, which you probably can’t walk out of the store holding one of them anyway. You’re just going there to sign up for a waitlist.
Which again is a very different experience than the Hermès retail experience. You can’t walk out of there with a Birkin, but you sure as hell can walk out of there with a scarf, a piece of furniture, or an Apple Watch strap, et cetera.
It is astounding that Rolex has had the discipline to remain just a watch company. Imagine the opportunity to become a fully-diversified luxury company. Rolex jackets, Rolex sunglasses, Rolex fragrance, Rolex you-name-it. Rolex luggage. Why are they not in the luggage business?
Ben: You could make 904L steel carry-ons.
David: Make Rimowa look like child’s play here. I suspect that this is part of the reason not to have gone directly into retail. Maybe. I don't know.
Ben: I don’t think so. Do you think Rolex is going to give into customers saying, I wish I could buy other things in this store or ignoring the free money?
David: I could be way off base here, but just really imagine. Okay, what does it take to operate these retail locations? These days you’re competing for physical space with LVMH. You are in the most expensive, highest rent, highest-end places on earth. Again, you may not necessarily care about your margins. Maybe you can take that hit and they have tons of cash. Maybe you can even buy the real estate.
But just as a shopper experience for the people that are now visiting those locations, they want to go and they want to have an experience. They walk out with product. If there’s a Rolex-only store and all there is is the six, seven, eight models there that you cannot walk out of the store with, what is it doing?
Ben: It’s a high-end Bonobos.
David: Yeah, it’s a high-end Bonobos.
Ben: Except you have no idea when you’ll get the call.
David: Exactly. Now compare that to a Bucherer where you can’t walk out of there with Rolex, but you can walk out of there with a…
Ben: A whole bag full of TAG Heuers.
David: Exactly. And it’s a non-exclusive market. Anybody who’s a watch collector isn’t just a Rolex collector. I’m sure there are some people, but I think for a lot of people who love Rolex, they’re also going to own a Panerai or they’re going to own a whatever, and that doesn’t hurt their relationship with Rolex.
Ben: Fair. The question remains, why did they buy Bucherer? Here’s my supposition. Yes, it will help them improve their economics for watches that they sell through Bucherer, but not why they did it. Yes, it will help them improve leverage over other retailers, but they didn’t need that.
They already do things like, gee, it would be nice if you wanted to remain a Rolex authorized dealer if you sunk a whole bunch of capital costs into rebuilding this part of the store to make it better. Oh no, no. We mean you. We would like you to do that. We will get back to you this December if we’re going to renew the contract for next year for you to stay a dealer or not. But let us know in those renovations.
They have all the leverage, all of it. I don’t think it’s like, oh now we own this retailer. They didn’t need that at all. It will also let them have a tighter grip on watch allocation and the customer touchpoint.
David: Waitlist management, which I agree is a huge liability for them right now.
Ben: But they didn’t need to own the AD to do that.
David: They had the leverage to take control anyway.
Ben: They could easily have said, hey, in the contract for next year’s renewal, we’re putting in a clause that you are no longer allowed to maintain waitlists on your own for customers. We’re centralizing that, and if we catch you doing it, you lose your license for the next year.
David: Great point.
Ben: They absolutely could have done that. Now maybe they didn’t feel that was ethical. They’re like, look, it’s the dealer’s business. We have to let them run their business. But you could solve this without buying someone who represents 8% or whatever Bucherer is of their total sales.
I honestly think the biggest reason to do it was so no one else buys it. Bucherer is a 100-year-old relationship. The family didn’t have anyone to pass it to. They’re looking to sell. Rolex is a very private company. They don’t want anyone else owning an asset that has a lot of visibility into Rolex itself since they sell so much of Rolex’s inventory. They don’t want a public company to own it and start reporting how many Rolex watches were sold that year through that. That’d be horrible for Rolex
David: And I’m sure LVMH would’ve loved to have owned Bucherer.
Ben: Absolutely. They own Sephora. You don’t think they want to own Bucherer? And Buser also comes with Tourneau, the American retailer, which I’m sure Rolex doesn’t really want to own Tourneau, but here they are. I think it was so no one else buys it.
David: I think you’re probably right.
Ben: I do agree, though, the reason that people are all up in arms about this, I never got the call from my authorized dealer and the whole waitlist thing, is because waitlists were only really a thing for until honestly 2015 for steel Daytonas. The rest of it, you could just buy.
It’s this whole, new notion of having the privilege to go spend $7000–$20,000 on something and getting told no by the local jeweler, that’s crazy. Most of the time they’re going to say yes, absolutely. Let me walk you to the checkout aisle.
Because it’s a new motion the old way of doing it, they basically didn’t have the infrastructure to have a properly managed… I know you are taking out the luxury strategy and you’re showing me the page of—
David: May I please remind you of Anti-Laws of Marketing number six—dominate the client—and number seven—make it difficult for clients to buy. Oh, also number five—do not respond to rising demand.
Ben: But honestly until 2015, you could just buy a Rolex from most of them, except for the ones that they deliberately wanted to use as hey, this one’s hard to get. I should just be able to walk in and buy a Sub, you know?
That’s how customers feel because that’s how it always was. Then each AD is using their own mystical portal of waitlist, which really means how many Instagram followers do you have? Or are you famous enough for me to allocate one of the six that I get to sell this month to you? It’s a customer hostile experience.
If Rolex just put in the contracts, guess what? We’re managing the list. We’re going to actually manage it, and we’re going to publish how it works, I think they can earn a lot of customer goodwill, they wouldn’t have to go buy a bunch of retailers and figure this whole thing out.
David: Totally agree. They absolutely could do that.
Ben: I will say I don’t think Rolex wanted to be in the luxury business. I think they wanted to be a lifestyle brand. I think they wanted to have fantastic engineering. I think they wanted to continue making things a little bit better every year. They wanted to have the very best brand they could with customers. But I think global luxury happened to them.
David: And they didn’t really have a good choice after the quartz crisis, other than to do this.
Ben: I heard an anecdote that Richemont, and in particular Cartier decided that they were going to start acting like a luxury watch brand, and they reconvened the watch industry around them in a luxury way. An example being to compete with Baselworld or the Basel Fair.
Richemont started their own thing in Geneva and they said, look, the industry gathers here in Geneva now and we’re going to be fancy about it. No one’s eating bratwurst anymore on the show floor. We’re going to sell watches to customers with champagne, caviar, and a presentation ceremony. If you’re not doing that, guess what? That’s what watches are now.
I don’t think Rolex was the driver of that, I guess is what I’m saying. I think the industry went that way, and they happened to be the most prestigious high-volume player in it. They’re trying to figure out what it means to be an accidental luxury brand.
David: I can totally believe that. Go back to Hans Wilsdorf. That was totally not his vision for the company. His vision was a Rolex watch on every wrist.
Ben: Okay. Now that we’re over in scarcity land, I want to revisit the question. Have they gone too far in their unavailability? Well, the main reason, I honestly believe this, that they didn’t ramp production to meet customer demand isn’t positioning. It’s not, we’re a luxury brand. We don’t do that. It is, they don’t want to destabilize the business.
Good times come. Bad times come. We do not want to be the brand that ramped 20% in one year and is now slashing MSRP, which lots of watch brands have to do, and embarrasses their customers who just bought it at full price and now suddenly it’s 20% off. That’s a horrible way to destroy your brand.
Cartier overproduced watches in 2016 and had to destroy hundreds of millions of dollars of inventory. This kind of thing doesn’t happen to Rolex. Very incremental, slow increases to production over time. That’s the thing that has served them well. They never want to be anywhere close to the line of what the real demand is. There’s this business physics lesson here. It’s very hard for a business to ever get smaller than its largest ever.
David: It’s like a down round in venture-backed companies.
Ben: Yeah. Customers don’t like it, employees don’t like it. It’s hard to shrink your overhead to rational new realities after bubbles pop. It just doesn’t feel the same as when it was always your biggest best year ever. I think Rolex just really doesn’t want to ever be in a position of that.
They’re like conservative to a fault on slow, modest increases in production, slow changes. When there’s a bubble and a whole bunch of new fans of your brand come in, it’s like an immovable object meeting an unstoppable force. They’re just not going to meaningfully ramp.
The biggest thing they did do is they started this new production facility construction that will be open in 2027 or something. But even that, I don't know, that’ll be maybe 10%, maybe 15% bump when that comes online. But I think they’re torn right now because they don’t want to have all these customers whose demands they can’t meet, but they also don’t want to risk destabilizing the next 100 years.
David: New demand is actually a risk if you’re taking a very long-term view.
Ben: And managing valuable customers who want a long-term relationship with you, and who are angry while you’re trying to protect your own stability is hard.
David: Which, coming back to the waitlist, I think this is the positive justification for a waitlist. Making sure that those people who become clients, buy your products, and participate in your brand really want it, and aren’t just there because it’s the hot flavor of the week and they’re going to be gone next month.
Ben: Rolex cares about that, but not as much as Patek Philippe. Patek Philippe, they want to make sure that they are appeasing the collectors and the true fan. Rolex, I think they acknowledge that they’re very commercial. They’re here for the executive who got a promotion, the doctors, the dentists, the lawyers, and the finance guys. That’s their bread and butter. I don’t think they want to lose the brand patina with that huge volume of material wealth in aggregate.
David: James Dowling again put this to me in a really good, visceral way. The typical Rolex buyer is not comparison shopping with Patek or any other brand. They are comparison shopping with do I buy this Rolex or do I upgrade my 911?
Ben: That’s interesting. One more rumor I heard, and this should totally justify Rolex isn’t happy that they’re not able to make enough watches, like really maintain this. Steel Daytonas, sure. Rainbow whatever, sure. Those can maintain rare. But Submariners should be on shelves, or at least two weeks later you should get a call about it.
I heard that in 2020 to 2022, they asked employees to come in six days a week instead of five to meet demand. If that’s true, that’s a pretty telling symbol about how they feel about it.
David: Now is a good time (I think) to bring up, there’s one more piece of Rolex the corporation and the story, which for the longest time (I think) both of us were totally puzzled by. When we were in Taipei to interview Morris in January, we went into Taipei 101 and we were walking around in the shopping mall. We walked by Tudor.
Ben: Well, it was an authorized dealer that had both Rolex and Tudor, which I think a lot of ADs or maybe all ADs, if you take Rolex, you have to take Tudor.
David: What is Tudor? Tudor, like the British royal Tudor family, is Rolex’s sub-brand.
Ben: Sort of. Technically, it’s another company owned by the Hans Wilsdorf Foundation, but in practice, yeah.
David: This is Rolex’s sub-brand. Ben, to your earlier point, if you’re going to make an argument that Rolex does not want to be a luxury company, a textbook violation of the luxury strategy is to have a sub-brand. We’re like, what the hell is this Tudor thing? Why do they have it? And if you look at the Tudor products, a lot of them are the Rolex products.
Ben: Dude. Okay. Tudor was started by Hans Wilsdorf in 1926, with the stated purpose to be a more affordable brand to Rolex while maintaining high-quality standards. Originally, they actually were Rolex cases and bracelets, but with off-the-shelf movements from a third-party vendor, ETA, which is actually now part of Swatch Group, versus the ones that Rolex was getting from Aegler, You’d look at it, and it would look like a Submariner.
David: Totally. You walk into a Tudor authorized dealer, you go on the website and you’re like, wow, that sure looks like a GMT-Master, that looks like an Explorer, and that looks like a Submariner.
Ben: Even today, it almost feels like knock-offy, except that the Rolex knock-offs are shockingly good. You go a decade owning a knock-off and not realizing it.
David: Yup. So for the longest time, I (at least I think you were too), what is going on here? And then we realized the real limiting factor to Rolex production is movements. Movements are the hard thing to make. All their movements are Aegler movements now in-house Rolex movements, Tudor does not use Aegler movements, does not use Rolex movements. They use third-party movements.
Ben: This is funny. I hadn’t had this insight.
David: Tudor is the release valve here. They can ramp up production of the Tudor “Submariner” or “GMT-Master” or “Explorer” or whatever with third party movements, and that’s okay.
Ben: But what do you mean release valve? Customers can’t get a Rolex, so they get a Tudor.
David: I think that probably rarely happens, but to Hans’s original vision of I want everybody to be able to own a Rolex, this is the way that they can have that happen.
Ben: I don’t think that’s it. I don’t think they care at all about that. Here’s my logic. It is a shockingly low percent of Rolex’s production. Less than 1%. If that were true, they would sell Tudors in volume.
Let’s take a Black Bay. This is sort of the Tudor Submariner, $4000. Most people don’t know or care about the Black Bay. If they walk in thinking they want a Rolex, they’re not walking out with a Black Bay. They sell so few of these things. What are they doing?
I think it’s an innovation lab. It’s a way to protect Rolex’s brand, because if there’s something new and interesting that might be a fad, that customers seem to be caring about in the watch world, Tudor can go and implement it, and they can figure out how to produce it. If it’s a flop, that’s fine. The watch aficionados who know about Tudor expect them to come out with weird stuff that flops. But if it’s durable, then Rolex might get it in 5–10 years with even more polish and thoughtfulness.
They’ve tested all sorts of stuff with Tudor—dial colors, ceramic bezels, titanium watches. A lot of these now are slowly making their way into Rolexes. I think the key thing is they can use Tudor to go and compete with Omega, TAG Heuer in the mid-market, and Tudor basically can punch up so that Rolex doesn’t ever have to punch down.
I heard a great phrase that the shield protects the crown. The Tudor shield protects the Rolex crown, which makes total sense. It’s so that they don’t ever have to risk doing something dumb chasing a competitor with Rolex, and Tudor can always go figure it out.
David: I love it. It’s like we used to think about the LP show. It’s our innovation lab.
Ben: And we still think about ACQ2 that way. If this is something we find interesting but we wouldn’t do it on the main show, or we just don’t have a place in our lineup for it, yeah it makes sense, and it still provides value for all sides. It’s still great for listeners, it’s still great for the guest, it’s still…
David: Great for us, yeah.
Ben: But what is it? It’s less than 10% of our show is listenership. It’s a great experimentation ground.
David: Yup.
Ben: The real watch nerds will tell you that they actually love Tudors, even though it’s a $4000 watch. The movements are incredibly high quality, and I think consumers actually might be getting a pretty good deal on Tudor watches.
If I go out tomorrow and buy an Explorer, that’s whatever MSRP is for $8000 or something, Rolex is making phenomenal margins on that thing. Tudor, they don’t sell that many of them. At a $4000 price point, that’s only $2500 wholesale for a very high quality movement, and there’s not a lot of them made, so economies of scale are really low.
Whatever the fixed costs are, there are not that many watches to amortize those across. I think there’s actually pretty significant upfront fixed costs. I don’t know. I’m sure they’re not losing money by having Tudor, but it’s a great deal for customers.
David: You’re totally right. I like your rationale better than mine.
Ben: Well, we both had a lot of good conversations to try to figure this out because you and I were texting each other, we were like, what are they doing? This is the worst luxury company ever.
David: Okay, well to wrap up at least the history here, level set us on today. What is the company today?
Ben: First of all, no one knows, but there’s a lot of really good ways to guess. Two great shout outs here. One is to our good friend of the show, Arvind Navaratnam. He, as usual, did an amazing long-form write-up of the business of Rolex, and he found awesome public sources of data. We’ll link to that in the show notes.
Secondly, the industry report that everyone refers to is this Morgan Stanley LuxeConsult Report, who sent us a copy in preparation for the episode. We did our own ways of trying to guess at these numbers in the shape of the business today, then we looked at the Morgan Stanley one and thought, okay, what’s the most reputable, well connected person who’s networking with all the dealers coming up with?
I would bet all this is within 10%–20% of right. I think they make about 1.1 million watches a year, maybe a little higher. Morgan Stanley said 1.24, so think 1.1–1.2 million a year.
David: Sounds right to me.
Ben: For revenue, think about it as around $11 billion in revenue that they do in sales. The interesting thing is to start to look at market share. The share of the Swiss watch market that Rolex has by revenue is completely insane. Morgan Stanley and LuxeConsult estimate at 30.3% of the whole Swiss watch industry. No one else even comes close. Cartier and Omega have 7.5% each. Truly the number two and three player are at, what is that a quarter?
David: Yeah. The number two and three players are at slightly less than half of the scale of combined of Rolex.
Ben: Exactly. Patek Philippe is at 5.6%, again by revenue. Patek Philippe makes fricking expensive watches, and they still only are at 5.6%, one-sixth of Rolex. Audemars Piguet is at 5%, then you just have massive fragmentation down from there.
Rolex makes something that isn’t crazy expensive, but it’s pretty expensive, and they sell the absolute crap out of them. On a unit basis—that was revenue that we just talked about—they make something like 15 times the number of watches that Patek Philippe makes, 22 times Audemars Piguet. It’s crazy. People even talk about these brands like they’re in the same sentence just based on the volume of output.
David: They’re totally different segments of the market.
Ben: In terms of price, Rolex’s average selling price, not Rolex’s price, but what the retailers sell it for, it’s around $13,000. Audemars Piguet is $48,000. Vacheron Constantin is $38,000. Patek Philippe, $40,000. Totally different categories.
This is part of my argument that Rolex really isn’t luxury at all. They have hit the sweet spot in the market. If you think about a curve like an XY axis, they have found the sweet spot where you can maximize revenue, where you just sell an absolute ton of watches that let people express something about themselves. But you stay away from that insanity of the true luxury market that limits you to a very small number of production. They’re almost like their own thing entirely.
David: It’s interesting. The secondary market really lets them do this, I think. Even though the model lineup of Rolex has remained stable for so many decades now or relatively stable for so many decades, because of the minute changes in all the reference numbers in the models, you actually have incredible scarcity and rarity for—
Ben: For people who care. You segment the market.
David: Yeah, certain flavors, and that can become the multi-hundred thousand dollars watch market for Rolex, the multimillion dollar watch market for Rolex. They can participate in the same thing that Patek and Audemars, et cetera are participating in. Just do it through the secondary market.
Ben: Or even special editions in the primary. You look at the rainbow dial Daytona.
David: Oh, the emoji watch. That thing is pretty baller.
Ben: They can do these extremely. They play in Patek Philippe land, both to your point in the secondary market, but also in their limited edition special watch market.
David: But I think if they weren’t as strong a player in the secondary market, because obviously they don’t really monetize that directly, I think they wouldn’t then have the permission to go put out these special editions that sell for a couple of hundred thousand dollars in the primary market.
Ben: The thing they’ve done so genius and beautifully well is to create something that the whole world knows about, that everybody looks at as a sign of success, that you’ve made it, that you’re like those divers, you’re like those pilots, and you’re like those explorers. If you have one, and because it’s universally agreed upon, as global wealth grew, they basically just got to index it.
David: Think about it. I certainly don’t want to imply that a Rolex is not a lot of money. It is a lot of money that is inaccessible to the vast majority of people. However, let’s say you work a solid white collar job in America these days. You get a big promotion, you have a big life event, you have a kid, et cetera. Is it reasonable that you could purchase a Rolex?
Ben: It’s right on the edge of unreasonable, which is exactly where they need to be to have this market.
David: Exactly. If you make sacrifices, you can probably do it, depending on what your salary is.
Ben: Truly since the 1950s, there is a wealth class that has emerged. Doctors, lawyers, finance people, recently tech people if they can really figure out that market, that absolutely can go buy a $10,00-plus watch if it’s the thing they choose to buy.
A Porsche 911 is not. It is completely inaccessible. It is an impractical car for 10 times as much money. It’s a pretty sweet little market to have that it’s this almost unreasonable thing that a whole lot of people can buy.
David: And to your point about the confounding this of luxury, I still maintain it. It is managed in the same fashion as the world’s best luxury brands. However, it sounds a lot like a BMW to me or a Mercedes. A Mercedes or a BMW, again, most people can’t afford them and don’t buy them or lease them, but for a lot of people, well beyond the 1%, if it’s something you really want in your life, there’s probably a way you can make it happen.
Ben: Well most people finance BMWs, but nobody’s… Well, I think people probably finance Rolexes.
David: I think there are ways to finance Rolexes.
Ben: It’s interesting. I did some thinking about allegories to other categories like handbags or fashion or cars. It’s quite tempting to say that Rolex is Louis Vuitton and that Paddock is Hermès, but Rolex isn’t quite Louis Vuitton. That’s not giving Rolex enough credit.
David: It’s not managed like LVMH at all.
Ben: They are very careful stewards of the brand in a way that Louis Vuitton will slap it on t-shirts. My best comparison that I think I came up with is Rolex is Porsche. I know there are different categories of price, but cars are expensive things, and you do need one anyway.
It’s real scale manufacturing with a high quality engineered product, with extremely good margins, differentiated by their brand. You stick to six core models, you iterate and refine each one of them once or twice a decade. The Submariners, the 911. You can buy what your grandpa had 50 years ago and it still looks modernized. And it’s actually a pretty good comp to call Patek Philippe Ferrari.
David: Totally.
Ben: We don’t care what you think. We are making this for us, we are making it for collectors. It’s…
David: Very small volume production.
Ben: Very small volume production. It’s five times more expensive.
David: Totally, and that’s a completely different market. Ferrari, Lamborghini, you’re talking million dollar-plus cars, is a very, very different thing from an $80,000 car.
Ben: Bottom line of what I’ll stick to is Paddock is Ferrari and Porsche is Rolex.
David: And it’s a really good business to be in
Ben: Yes.
David: It’s ideal to your point. They have found the ideal point on the curve here.
Ben: I think that’s it. They multiplied two pretty big numbers together instead of one big number on one small number. The way it manifests in watches is unique and different from other markets too. Thirty percent of the Swiss watch industry. Other categories don’t have this outsized winner. Even in handbags where Louis Vuitton is so… They print money, somewhere around 20%.
I think Rolex defines the category of watches. Hermès doesn’t do this, Louis Vuitton doesn’t do this, Porsche doesn’t do this. Those are all much more fragmented markets.
David: Totally.
Ben: And for people who think we’re like blow and smoke here of how is Rolex not high-end luxury, Rolex, we were just saying, average price of $13,000. You look at Richard Mille. This is a $280,000, maybe $300,000 average price point.
Jacob and Co, $100,000. Audemars Piguet that we were just talking about, Van Cleef, Patek Philippe, Vacheron Constantine, Blancpain, [...]. These are all meaningfully more expensive average price points than Rolex. Rolex is the name you know, but it’s not the most expensive watch by a mile you could buy. There are 15 other brands that are higher end. But success in America in owning a nice watch is a Rolex.
David: I think that’s what’s so amazingly unique about this company.
Ben: Okay. Employee count. They have about 16,000 people worldwide. About 9000 of those are in Switzerland. I had a lot of fun trying to size this market, trying to figure out Swiss watches versus watches.
The Swiss watch industry is something like $35 billion wholesale before the retail markup across all players, including the super high-end, Omega, Swatch, and everyone else. Rolex does about $11 billion of that $35 billion, which we’ve talked about, holy crap. But where it gets very interesting is when we zoom out from just Swiss watches. Switzerland produces 2% of the world’s watches. Two percent.
David: And everything else is a $10 piece of crap.
Ben: And to put some real numbers on that, Switzerland makes 17 million watches a year. Most estimates are that there are between 700 and 900 million watches made in the world every year. Seven to 900 million, including smart watches, cheap $25 watches, you have it.
This 2% of units sold that happens in Switzerland accounts for 45% of the dollars in all watches. Smart watches, Timexes, all the stuff that’s made in Hong Kong and China. Two percent of units are made in Switzerland, and 45% of the revenue is captured there.
David: Apple alone ships way more Apple Watches every year than the entire Swiss watch industry. Way more.
Ben: Oh absolutely. Estimates on the smartwatch industry are like 80 million smart watches a year.
David: I think Apple, depending on the year, does like 30 to 50.
Ben: It’s funny, the 17 million watches, that includes a whole bunch of Swatches and fashion watches. Switzerland makes a lot of quartz also. It is true that 45% of the dollars come from 17 million watches out of 700–900 million. But it’s actually even more concentrated than just that 17 million because none of the quartz watches contribute that much to the revenue.
To make that point, specifically, 86% of Switzerland’s watch export comes from mechanical watches. That whole move in the quartz crisis to lean hard into mechanical really, really, really worked from a dollar perspective. So 40% of all watch revenue in the world came from Swiss mechanicals. Mechanicals.
David: Amazing.
Ben: So then you start to look at net profit. Well, Rolex has 30% of the Swiss market by revenue, but probably even more by profit.
David: It’s totally an Apple situation here.
Ben: Morgan Stanley and LuxeConsult estimate that of the $35 billion in total revenue for Swiss watch manufacturers, there’s about $11.8 billion of total profit, implying that the industry-wide operating margin is 29%. Do you think Rolex has an operating margin of just 29%?
David: Hell no.
Ben: And frankly, there are a lot of people in this category who have negative operating margin. There are these big conglomerates that are trying to get into watches. They’re not generating a lot of profit there right now.
There are a lot of estimates between 30% and 40%. I would bet it’s way closer to 40% for Rolex’s operating margin. My best guess is that while they account for 30% of the industry’s revenue, it’s in the neighborhood of 40% of the total Swiss profit.
David: Totally agree. They’re also so vertically integrated except for retail, that you have to imagine that ultimately that would create a better profit structure too.
Ben: Has to be. Then you get to balance sheet. This is truly anyone’s guess. They’re spitting off something like $3 billion–$3.5 billion a year, maybe more, maybe $4 billion. And they’ve done (call it) $2 billion–$3 billion for at least a decade or two. It’s not crazy to think that they’ve piled up $50-plus billion in cash even before investment returns.
David: It’s totally an IKEA situation. There are tons and tons of cash sitting there.
Ben: And in IKEA we could see it in annual reports. I have no idea what Rolex’s assets look like.
David: So the Hans Wilsdorf Foundation, of course doesn’t publish any numbers publicly, but they have said, and people have estimated that they give away around 300 million Swiss francs every year, which by your numbers would be about one-tenth of the cash that the business is generating.
Ben: Or less.
David: And still that makes them one of the most active annual dispersing foundations on the planet.
Ben: It’s unbelievable. It’s a very broad base of philanthropic initiatives—environmental, science, arts—and it’s not like they’re just doing things that help Rolex. This is a very legitimate charitable foundation, not to mention it seems like they’re just giving money away all over Geneva.
David: This is the coolest thing about it. A core part of the mission of the foundation that Hans put in its by-laws is to help the city and people of Geneva. I think they’ve found over the years, come to a belief that the best way to do that often is just giving people money.
If people need money—a family can’t make rent, have a health issue come up or something—they can apply for grants and they’ll just give them money, and they don’t make a big deal about it.
Ben: It’s pretty interesting. One thing they definitely do with their money—again, I think it’s safe to just ballpark, there’s $50 billion before investment returns sitting there, but again, plus or minus 50%—they own some of the most expensive real estate in the world.
They own their own buildings in Switzerland. They own in the Bond Street house area in London some really, really prime real estate. In Milan, in Melbourne, in Tokyo, famously in New York City, there’s a gorgeous building that they’re building about a block from Rockefeller Center and Radio City Music Hall. The old Rolex building was nice. This new one that’s going to be done next year, the architectural drawings look unbelievable. They own a building in Manhattan,
David: Hey, you got to put the money somewhere. Real estate is a good place as any,
Ben: They own a lot of real estate in Geneva. They own a big service center in Dallas, the school in Pennsylvania. Hilariously, they just bought the building where Omega has their flagship store in Geneva. Omega makes a rent check out to Rolex every month.
David: Amazing.
Ben: That’s not in the category of asset management, but it is in the category of spite. I don’t know. It’s pretty funny.
David: A 100% safe assumption that there’s a boatload of money sitting there.
Ben: So that’s the shape of the business today. The question is how would you value it. If this were a publicly-traded company today, you could look at it based on a sector multiple of other watch companies. But come on, applying the Swatch multiple is not the right way to value Rolex.
Maybe Patek Philippe since it’s also a vertically-integrated, very strong brand, but it’s privately held. We have no idea. Patek Philipp is very Rolex-y in a lot of ways, other than the fact that they’re multiplying a big number by a small number instead of two pretty big numbers.
You could look at conglomerates like LVMH or Richemont, but there’s too much other stuff in there. Rolex is a pure-play mono brand with the leading brand in the sector.
David: There’s only one comp for this business.
Ben: There are maybe two with Porsche and Hermès, but I think you’re right that’s Hermès. I’m assuming that’s where you’re going.
David: That’s where I was going, yeah.
Ben: Porsche trades at 15x earnings, Hermès trades at 60x earnings. My best estimates on Rolex’s growth rate is actually in the same neighborhood as Hermès’s growth rate. Hermès’s margin profile is also pretty similar to a 40%-ish operating margin.
David: That’s where this business differs from Porsche.
Ben: I actually think if growth rate’s close and if the operating margin’s close, and if it’s a single premium brand that’s the best in the sector is the same, you totally could value it at what Hermès is valued at.
David: Which is roughly a 20x revenue multiple.
Ben: Or a 60x earnings multiple.
David: But we have no idea what Rolex’s earnings are.
Ben: But I think you can back into Rolex’s earnings being in the neighborhood of $3 billion–$4 billion a year, pre-Tax, pre all this stuff, I think. But you’re right. Maybe you just put it on the revenue multiple.
David: Well, okay. Here would be an argument for putting it on the revenue multiple. Again, not that you could ever do this, because this business is never going to trade. But there are a million things that Rolex could do differently to improve their operating margins, and they’re just not going to.
There’s the long-term aspect of like, well, if they were to do that, then that would erode their positioning in the space.
Ben: So all this to say, the range is too wide to just give you a single number and say, here’s what I think Rolex is worth. But there are plausible scenarios all the way from $40 billion–$50 billion to $200 billion.
David: I agree.
Ben: Before assets. That’s just enterprise value.
David: Before any cash they have in the balance sheet, real estate, who God knows what other investments they have.
Ben: This is insane.
David: There’s no way that this business is worth $40 billion. I don’t know if it’s worth $200 billion, but it’s worth $100-plus billion, zero doubt in my mind.
Ben: And before assets, keep in mind, market cap includes assets. If this thing were to publicly trade listing with its assets, it’s probably top 50 companies in the world.
David: Again, Hermès has a €292 billion market cap. Depending on what the assets are within Rolex, yeah.
Ben: There’s a chance this thing’s worth more than American Express or Goldman Sachs or Adobe or Pepsi or Disney or Qualcomm or AT&T.
David: Kind of like the Rolex business better than a lot of those businesses. All that to say this all feels profane because…
Ben: Ugh, they would never.
David: Yeah, can’t trade this thing.
Ben: I think the issue, if I were to buy any shares of Rolex, would be that I could never do anything with them because I could never sell the shares.
David: Well, you’d have to ask yourself, why am I getting these shares? Who is selling them to me? Is it a fake? Which, by the way, we didn’t talk about that. I don’t think it’s worth much detail, but I think actually for a long time the fake market was great for Rolex.
Ben: Interesting.
David: Just that Rolex certainly was, and I’m sure probably still is the most faked, certainly watch brand if not any brand in the world. I think that was good for them, not so much recently.
Ben: Because it raised awareness while they were still…
David: Raising awareness and then building the prestige of the brand.
Ben: I’d say 1990s and maybe early 2000s, probably a good thing. You go to New York City and hope to get to Canal Street to try to buy some fake Rolexes on your trip to New York. I think that’s totally right.
David: Exactly. It just adds to the myth in the legend.
Ben: Yeah, but now…
David: Now, yeah. Probably not a big deal.
Ben: It’s also so weird that these fakes are so good. You can go to reasonably reputable online retailers and not be sure that you’re getting an authentic Rolex. A lot of times it’s the wrong movement in the right case, or part of it’s counterfeit but not all of it. All right, should we move into analysis?
David: Let’s do it.
Ben: All right. Power. This is where we use Hamilton Helmer’s framework of seven powers to analyze what is it that helps a business to achieve persistent differential returns, or what makes this business more profitable than their closest competitor sustainably. So branding…
David: Quite the task for us here.
Ben: Should we just move on or…
David: Just for new listeners, the seven options are counter positioning, scale economies, network economies, switching costs, process power, branding, and cornered resources.
Ben: I think the interesting thing is to stack them against who is their closest competitor. In some senses it’s Patek Philippe. In some senses, I would say it’s Omega.
David: In some senses it’s Apple.
Ben: That I completely disagree on. I’ll go to the mattresses on Rolex. It’s not a time telling device. This has nothing to do with function.
David: Totally agree. However, there’s only so much real estate space on your wrist, and most people are not going to wear two things on each wrist.
Ben: I’ve been dual watching all week one on each wrist and it’s a little much.
David: Oh, do you feel a little funny?
Ben: Feel a little funny. You’re right. It is competitive for wrist real estate, and it’s irrelevant that they both tell the time.
David: Neither of them tells the time.
Ben: One is a piece of craftsmanship on my wrist and the other is notification center.
David: Totally. And fitness.
Ben: Yeah. And is actually a huge reason I wear my Apple Watch, and I’ve worn it every day to bed for nine years.
David: Same. Just that instrumenting of both calories and sleep. Same every day for years and years.
Ben: Okay, so that’s competitive. But interestingly, I don’t think about the prices of those since they don’t achieve the same function. I don’t compare their prices. When you’re thinking about what enables Apple’s profits versus Rolex’s profits, if I go buy a Rolex, I will pay about 10 times more than I paid for my Apple Watch.
David: In some ways this is a silly exercise because the whole point of the last God knows how many hours here is they actually don’t have any competitors. There’s nobody for them to counter position against.
Ben: I think the interesting thing is to think about in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, what was the source of their power? What activities were they performing that gave them power? Because today’s almost boring. It’s just branding, I think.
David: Branding and just category ownership. Well, there just is nobody else.
Ben: In 1985, it was interestingly capital structure. Why did Omega do dumb stuff and Rolex didn’t? That doesn’t really fit into this framework. That’s not about strategy, that’s about tactics. That’s a failure of execution to make the wrong decision.
David: I think maybe the more interesting question is, rewind back to the lifestyle era, post–World War II when they’re launching all the professional watches, the sport watches. Was that counter positioning versus the rest of the industry?
Ben: I don’t think so, because I don’t think they were doing anything that the rest of the industry couldn’t. They were executing really well on a brand strategy that was really cohesive with their product strategy around the professional watches. But I don’t know that their competitors couldn’t do that. There was some structural reason why they couldn’t.
Quartz was counter positioned against Switzerland, but I don’t think Rolex was counter positioned against other Swiss. I think it was tactics.
David: Good point. I agree.
Ben: The only other one I could see on here is once they hit escape velocity in the 1990s, scale economies is a big one. The reason why they truly are among the very highest quality watches in the world is because they throw their scale economies around. They do absolutely unreasonable things to engineer and build and test these watches that other people in the industry just can’t.
David: And their leverage over retailers too. I think at the end of the day, though, I maintained that we can debate the semantics of luxury products, price points, et cetera. This company is managed by the best luxury companies, and that playbook exists outside of seven powers.
Ben: I know. It is.
David: The goal of managing a successful luxury brand is to manage for the long-term. By the long-term, I mean centuries. You’re actually willing to sacrifice huge amounts of profits to do so.
Ben: Oh, right. It would be wrong to look at this year’s or even the next five years operating profits when analyzing a business like this.
David: Totally. You almost want to have it worse margin structure at any given moment, especially during the good times.
Ben: If it strengthens your intangible asset. That’s an interesting insight. Playbook?
David: Playbook.
Ben: If I were to pose the question to you, how does Rolex have 30% market share of dollars when the next highest only has 7.5%? What’s the main reason? Why are they able to have such a massive lead in this industry?
And maybe let me lead the witness with like a little bit of what I’m stuck on. When did Rolex actually take risk? Because typically outsized winners with outsized rewards come from doing something risky or counterintuitive at the right time. A lot of the time I think Rolex just made a rational decision.
David: And executed better than anyone. I’m thinking about the three putt to get on the wrist of Eisenhower.
Ben: Or had really good ideas.
David: Or the lifestyle marketing and working with both J. Walter Thompson and IMG and the testimonees. They just did better than everyone else, and that advantage compounded over time.
Ben: Was it really a risk how they played the quartz crisis? I don’t know. They looked around and they were in a privileged position where they had the resources and the structure to do that.
The same with 2008. Did they take a risk? Not really. They did the logical thing and they had the structure and resources to pull it off to go hard into marketing in the United States. I think a lot of the time they just had resources and structure that let them find these opportunities to do a rational, logical, low risk thing, and continue to pull away from competitors.
David: Maybe it’s a little dangerous to speak for Rolex because Rolex doesn’t speak and nobody speaks for them. But I suspect if they were to answer the question, they would say some version of continuity.
Not that there haven’t been major changes in different eras of the company, but they have stuck with a strategy, a positioning, a product lineup, and a culture longer than just about anybody else.
Ben: I was reflecting on the question. The one time I think they really did take risk was the risk watch order from Aegler. That’s not the answer to why they have 30% market share today, but that was huge.
David: That’s the only real bet the company move. When they did that, that huge order—I don’t think we talked about this—that they placed was for five times the capital that they had in the business. either it was a multi-year order or they financed it and probably both.
Ben: I’m sure Aegler extended them some credit.
David: But yeah, since then they made really, really shrewd decisions executed immensely well.
Ben: I think that’s the answer.
David: It feels very Swiss.
Ben: Yes it does. All right. Another weird playbook question I have for you. Occasionally, they do these weird exceptions to the rule, like the jigsaw puzzle Daydate with the emojis.
David: The emoji watch.
Ben: Or Domino’s pizza deal.
David: They’ve got just enough whimsy.
Ben: Is it whimsy? It’s not a cohesive weirdness. That’s the thing. You look at Hermès and you’re like, oh, all of the fun that you’re having is the same sort of fun. This is like once every 10 years they make a befuddling decision that doesn’t seem super impactful on their strategy, so I guess it was fine.
Tudor with Tiger Woods as the spokesperson. Why would you blow Tiger Woods on Tudor? It’s just occasionally these very odd, how did this make it out the door things about Rolex, and I don’t really have an answer for how that happens.
David: Sometimes I think it works really well. I don’t know sales numbers. Nobody does. But the relaunch of the Milgauss, awesome. Great decision.
Ben: Totally. It’s also funny the way that they do product naming. Man, the Milgauss used to basically be a Submariner, and when they relaunched it, it was basically an Explorer. The only thing it has in common is the name and the fact that it can go up to 1000 gauss.
Similar to the Explorer II. Completely new watch, different than the Explorer. The GMT-Master II. Basically A GMT-Master exactly. What does II mean when they release a sequel to a watch? How come, the Deep Sea Sea-Dweller is both a Deep Sea and a Sea-Dweller? Their product naming is confusing.
All right. We touched on smart watches a little bit. It’s worth a minute of analysis here. The Apple Watch comes out in 2014. Fascinatingly, and I’m not sure if this is counterintuitive or not, I don’t remember 2014 thinking about the watch industry because I didn’t, but it was the best thing to ever happen to Rolex, Audemars Piguet, Patek, et cetera. A huge amount of awareness raised for the category.
Oh, now I wear a thing on my wrist. Oh, I spent hundreds of dollars on the thing. Would I be open to spending thousands of dollars on the thing? Huh, I never even thought about that before. I’ve had a smartphone for a long time, so I haven’t been wearing anything on my wrist. Yeah, sure. Maybe. Oh, other people I look up to are doing that? Okay. Yeah. I guess I’m potentially into going up one level, even from a smartwatch. It was this very strange progression that definitely helped them.
However, it destroyed low-end luxury. [...], Tissot, TAG Heuer, anybody that was making a “luxury” mechanical watch between $500 and $1000, why?
David: Toast.
Ben: Complete toast. It doesn’t signal anything. I spent the same amount of money on this obsolete thing that I could have spent on an Apple Watch. Why? Are you stupid?
David: It’s funny. There’s a great New York Times piece before the Apple Watch that quotes a source at Apple as saying that Jony Ive was bragging around the company about how the forthcoming watch from Apple was going to destroy the Swiss watch industry.
Ben: Really? Well, I guess the addition, they really did think they were playing here.
David: Well, it’s hilarious because he was both 100% spot on and 100% wrong. He was spot on that, like you were saying, this lower fat end of the market in the Swiss industry, to the extent it even existed after the quartz crisis, this was the total final nail in the coffin. But for the tie end, like luxury Apple Watch edition, gold Apple Watch, Get out of here.
Ben: It’s crazy. The Apple Watch, it’s weird how they managed to decimate the low-end, but no one took the edition seriously. The Apple Watch addressed a completely new market. High-end watch people weren’t going to buy an Apple Watch, period, but for all the new people who were willing to buy an Apple Watch, there was no reason to buy a $10,000 watch.
David: And for a small subset of those people who bought Apple Watches, it then became the gateway into the high-end mechanical watch industry. Again, because of the way the market works, it doesn’t matter that that’s a very small number of people. Those very small number of people are spending a lot of money.
Ben: That’s exactly right. The other thing that it destroyed is the fashion watch industry. We didn’t touch on that this episode just because it was one more story that we couldn’t fit in. But the whole Swatch…
David: Swatch group is an amazing story.
Ben: Fossil, who else? Guess? In the 1990s, these quartz watches suddenly made $25 watches possible. That market went entirely away with the Apple Watch. The the Fossil watch stock went down 99% since the Apple Watch came out. That product category doesn’t exist anymore.
David: You know what would be amazing and will never happen? You know how car manufacturers except for Tesla have CarPlay and Android Auto? There needs to be Apple Watch play for high-end, especially mechanical watches. Never going to happen, of course. But I would love that.
Ben: I don’t even understand what you mean by that.
David: Where Rolex beget the fitness tracking.
Ben: Oh, that’s funny. The question is, is there’s someone at Rolex who’s working on this? Do they treat it the same way they treat quartz? Or do they feel entirely safe? Is there a research lab somewhere that’s trying to figure out what a Rolex smartwatch looks like?
David: I’m sure there is, and they’re never going to release it unless they absolutely have to.
Ben: No, those people must be pariahs around the building.
Talking about smart watches makes me remember this moment that we didn’t talk about was when the smartphone came out and really when cell phones came. Think the popularization of cell phones, 2002-ish, 2003-ish. Certainly by 2010 when smartphones were popular, that was the moment you didn’t need a watch anymore.
But in the very recent history, pre-2005, you needed a watch. Everybody needed a watch. Now, it’s just a thing you don’t need. There’s no more functioning alibi for this category. Everybody needs a car. Yeah, you can go spend a lot of money and buy a 911, but you have the functioning alibi of, well, I needed a car and I wanted a car. I like driving. Or a handbag.
David: Tell that to your spouse.
Ben: Look, I needed this because I need a purse. I got to carry stuff with me. Nobody for any reason needs a watch. It has no functioning alibi anymore. It is a pure display of, I feel like a better version of me when I wear this. That’s the only reason why I’m owning this thing. Oh, I love the gears, and I do truly. The engineering is so unbelievable to me, but it’s a much weaker, thinner alibi than these other categories.
David: Which probably also is no accident that it coincides with its real take-off as a luxury item.
Ben: Okay, in the vein of a functioning alibi, here’s a question I have for you. Why did this become the status symbol associated with success? This 200 geared steel thing that I wear on my wrist? Why not something else? What was it about this object?
David: Easy answer, obvious. It was for basically the entirety of the 20th century, the only acceptable form of male jewelry. Not to say that the women’s watch market wasn’t also big and important. It was, but it also bled into the jewelry market. In the man’s world, this is men’s jewelry.
Ben: You could wear your wedding ring and your watch.
David: It was the only broadly socially acceptable form of jewelry for men.
Ben: That’s interesting. For a long time it was, well you need to have one.
David: There’s a functioning alibi.
Ben: But there’s not for jewelry for the practical man who doesn’t need jewelry. I was a little bit setting you up. Then the follow up question is, can a status symbol stay a status symbol even after you get 100 years away from the last time it had utility?
Thirty to 40 years is one thing. I remember my parent, I remember my grandparent. But what about five generations after anyone really legitimately believes that the utility of a watch is justified?
David: Is there a risk that this becomes a version of the home telephone or something like that at some point? Or the fax machine?
Ben: I don’t think pieces of technology.
David: Maybe that’s a bad analogy.
Ben: I’m trying to think of something else that had utility, then became a status symbol, then we got so far away from its utility that it just failed to be a credible thing that people decided to use for their status anymore. It just became too thin of an alibi.
David: Well maybe to my previous answer, maybe over time these just become bracelets and jewelry.
Ben: I could see that. I don’t know. I don’t know the real answer to this, but I’m trying to think of other…
David: I don’t think it’s happening anytime soon, though.
Ben: All right. I’ve got just two more. One, we talked a lot about slow iterations and don’t change the line too much. The real answer here is that it helps your customers feel smart. There is great value in the fact that when I look down at my wrist and you look down at yours right now, the thing that they’re selling today is pretty much the same thing. Because of that, it means I made a good decision 20 years ago when I bought this. Of course I didn’t buy this one and you didn’t buy that one.
David: You’d feel really dumb if you bought a Turn-O-Graph.
Ben: And you’d feel really dumb if you bought the iPhone 3G and then two years later the iPhone 5s is out, and you’re like, whoa, that was a dumb decision to buy that product. Or at least that now I own something that’s not valuable. It helps Rolex’s long-term value to help their customers feel like they made a good decision when they bought the product.
Then the last one, have you ever heard the phrase former Rolex employee?
David: No. I’m sure that’s by design.
Ben: I only did once in the research. You start working at Rolex and you stay there. It’s a loyalty thing but it’s also an incentives thing. I think they pay very well, great benefits, great perks. You’re at the best company in the industry. This works really well for their secrecy.
David: And they’re actually doing cutting-edge stuff. It’s not like you’re just sitting there cranking the machine every day.
Ben: That’s absolutely right. Although, I’m sure a lot of people are sitting there doing the final finishing of their 10,000th Submariner they’ve done final finishing on.
David: Oh, yeah. But it’s constantly changing the parts that are going into it, how it’s done into all of it.
Ben: That’s true. All right. Quintessence. Time to land the plane.
David: Ah, land the plane. I had this blank. I often have this blank going in because I feel like we arrived there throughout the episode. Mine is Rolex is positioned at the perfect point on the curve of price and quantity. They’re the most optimally-positioned supply-demand curve company I think we’ve ever covered.
Ben: That’s interesting. The curve being supply-and-demand. I was thinking of the curve of units and price, but I guess that’s the same thing as supply-and-demand.
David: I think it’s the same thing.
Ben: That is certainly how you get 30% market share by revenue. That’s certainly how you produce $10 billion a year making watches. That makes total sense.
David: And how you have a waitlist years and years long for most of your models while also making over a million units a year.
Ben: They make so many people think they are buying something very special.
David: And they are.
Ben: And they are. That’s why I have great admiration for this company. We’ve thrown a lot of missives here and there, but we should just say like this is an unbelievable fantastic company that makes a remarkable product, and the strategy and execution by which they’ve executed that is best in the world ever.
David: I have one more addendum appendix that I did write down ahead of time to my quintessence that I will say before I hand the floor over to you. There’s no way to know for sure. Of course he’s been dead a long time, so it could be way off base.
As best as I can tell, Hans Wilsdorf seems like he was a really great dude. That’s not always the case of protagonists that we cover or founders that we cover here on Acquired. Sometimes, we cover actual Nazis. But, I could be wrong. Maybe he was a big jerk and that’s just been lost to history because there’s not that much out there.
But he seems like he was a genuinely good person. I get the sense really loved and was devoted to both of his wives, then devoted himself to the company and the legacy even though he never had children, and then putting the foundation together obviously was, in very large part, motivated by the long-term legacy of the company.
But also this foundation gives away 300 million Swiss francs a year. A huge portion of it just directly giving money to people in need in Geneva in their hometown. That’s amazing. He also made a star out of this secretary in London, Mercedes Gleitze, in 1927. He seems like a genuinely really good dude.
Ben: It’s pretty cool.
David: People ask us every now and then, oh do you have to be a certain type of person to found a company like this?
Ben: Still yes.
David: Well, I think you have to be crazy. But sometimes people ask, do you have to be ruthless or do you have to be a bad person or whatever? I think just on this dimension it’s just a microcosm of the world. Some people are good, some people are not good.
Ben: Well, you just have to be extremely something, and that extremely something has to fit well with your product, your market, and your timing. But that something is variable.
All right. I’ve got a quintessence and that I’ve got a fun notion to leave you with. I know it’s blasphemous to put things after a quintessence but…
David: Hey I did it. You can do it.
Ben: My quintessence is that calling this the high-end of the watch industry or the middle-end of the watch industry or whatever is just wrong. Mechanical watches are an industry today that serves an entirely different job to be done than they ever served in the past. This is a new industry that has nothing to do with telling the time, and is just goofy to compare to other “parts” of the watch industry, like the smart watch, the quartz watch, the fashion watch. They look the same, so we call them watches?
David: They both occupy wrist real estate.
Ben: Right, but we should define markets by the actual job to be done for customers. It is so, so, so incredible that coming out of the quartz crisis, this company found a completely new job to be done for their product, and had positioned themselves there the previous two decades with the professional watches, the tool watches, and the advertising.
David: Could not agree more.
Ben: So here’s the thing to leave you with. Rolex, interestingly, is the watch you want when you start getting into watches. But then it’s also the watch you end up at after you study the whole industry. You go through these exotic steps along the way on your journey with more artistry, more complications.
Certainly, you’ll find more expensive price points. But when it comes down to the most exquisite engineering, quality, serviceability, for a mechanical watch that is precise, waterproof and self-winding. Amazingly, the brand with mass appeal, that all the newbies want, that sells a million a year, is also the one of the highest quality.
David: A different version of this that I read somewhere, I don’t remember where in the research, was Rolex is a company that the more you study it, the more you like it.
Ben: I didn’t want to record this episode because it meant I was going to stop researching. Truly I have loved just bathing myself in this industry, this company, and their products.
David: Well boy, Ben, do I have good news for you. Because if you decide to go down the watch rabbit hole, it is deep. It is deep out there. The watch product blogs, Hodinkee, and everything beyond it.
Ben: I also came to this realization when you describe this curve, when you start it’s Rolex and when you finish this Rolex, and it’s a company that owns this category and all that, the comp is Apple.
If you go to Rolex’s website and you click any watch, it looks just like an Apple product page. The named components inside the proprietary parachrom hairspring, akin to a neural engine or a liquid retina display.
Their YouTube channel looks exactly like Apple’s high gloss promotional videos, products whizzing through space, plunging into water. The product is both mass produced and high margin. There’s a big brand premium, but it’s also the highest quality engineering in the industry.
Their financials look so good because they found the spot on the curve that lets them multiply two large numbers together. The large number of units and dollars per unit.
Billionaires have iPhones, people buying their first smartphone have iPhones, and unlike handbag or car categories, the phone and smartwatch do have a single company that defines it. Apple. Rolex and Apple are mirror image companies in a lot of ways.
David: Totally. Well I guess we got to do Apple now.
Ben: I guess so.
David: That is not going to be one episode.
Ben: No, and in retrospect, this one shouldn’t have been, either.
David: I don’t know where we would’ve broken it up though is the thing.
Ben: Eh, pre-quartz crisis post. But here we are. Thank you listeners.
David: Yeah, thanks listeners. This was a blast.
Ben: It really was. David, I have one piece of trivia for you.
David: Oh, before carve outs.
Ben: Yes.
David: Ooh. Can it top my [...] trivia, though?
Ben: That was pretty good.
David: I’m pretty proud of that one.
Ben: Rolex has gotten so sophisticated in its manufacturing, that they actually use ultraviolet lithography in making their watches.
David: Hell yeah.
Ben: It’s not an etching silicon because God forbid they should ever get anywhere near a semiconductor. It is etching a very specialized and precise type of gear that in the Rolex Daytona ensures the teeth are perfectly meshed together. So when you start your chronograph, there’s no jumping around, there’s no accidental tick back. It just starts exactly right.
David: Oh, that’s amazing.
Ben: I actually have one more piece of trivia for you, too.
David: Oh lay on me.
Ben: David, what watch company holds the record today for the watch that’s gone the deepest in the ocean?
David: This is got to be a trick question. It is of course Rolex. It went down the, but I’m assuming no.
Ben: Omega. But to Rolex’s marketing ability, guess what everyone thinks it is?
David: Wait, how did Omega go deeper? I thought Rolex went down the trench.
Ben: As you know, the Rolex Deep Sea Challenge happened in 2012, and in 2019 the Omega Seamaster Planet Ocean Ultra Deep Professional went 20 meters deeper.
David: What did they do? Drill a hole in the ground at the bottom of the trench?
Ben: I think they found a deeper part of the trench or something. David, this is just the most classic, classic Omega versus Rolex thing in the world. If you technically look at something, it doesn’t actually sit at the top. But for all its intent and purposes they do.
David: Amazing.
Ben: All right. Carve outs.
David: Carve outs. I just have one. Between the incredible amount of research for this episode and my entire family of ladies all being very, very sick with the flu over the last week-plus, I have literally had zero time for anything else in my life.
I have a carve out that I don’t think I’ve ever made a carve out before, but maybe impacts my life more than anything else, and I owe an extreme debt of gratitude too, for entertaining my very, very sick three-year-old over the last week, which is Bluey.
Thank you so much Joe Brumm and the Australian Broadcasting Company for creating the most wonderful children’s cartoon ever that my 3-year-old and millions and millions and millions of others out in the world will sit and watch, and I can watch with her and will not make me want to rip my eyeballs out.
Ben: Great. My 15-month-old will be into that soon enough, and I am sure I’ll take your recommendation.
David: Oh dude, it’s so good. It’s so good.
Ben: Oh, great.
David: There is not even a comparison. It is the greatest children’s content ever created.
Ben: All right, soon.
David: You’re in for a real treat.
Ben: Great. I have two. One is on the podcast armchair expert. David and I went and joined Dax and Monica a couple of weeks ago to review the business of the NFL. It was very fun to do an update to our episode and to do it with Dax and Monica, who are just great.
My second one is an app called ElevenReader by ElevenLabs. I’m sure it does more, but the thing that I use it for, which is totally amazing, is you either paste a link or the killer use case for me you upload a PDF, and in a very convincing AI voice that sounds remarkably human, it will read you something that was text.
I’m the person 15 years ago who was highlighting emails, right-clicking and using Apple’s built-in speech thing on laptops to read it to me, because I’m so much better at processing information audioly than visually.
For this episode, I had so many PDFs to read as a part of my research that were not audio books, that were not podcasts. I willed myself to read two physical books because this fricking Rolex is a whole pile of coffee table books is how people have published these. There are no Kindles or anything available.
ElevenReader totally saved my butt by letting me listen to a large amount of what I needed to research. The app is just awesome if you like turning text into a very compelling human-narrated voice.
David: Nice. I would say I have to give it a try, but fortunately I think this is a great strength of Acquired is…
Ben: You have the opposite.
David: We have the opposite research consumption styles. I need physical hard copies in front of me with a pencil that I am writing on.
Ben: And I’m best on a 10 mile run listening to something and stopping to take notes along the way.
David: Love it.
Ben: All right. Well, with that listeners, thank you so much to our partners this season, J.P. Morgan Payments, ServiceNow, Fundrise and Huntress. You can click the link in the show notes to learn more.
Special thank you to all the Rolex aficionados, buyers, dealers, and fans that we spoke with. A few in particular that we want to thank on air are Marc Bridge, the founder and CEO of At Present, a jewelry marketplace and good friend of David and mine.
Ben Clymer, the founder and CEO of Hodinkee, who let me talk his ear off and answer a zillion questions over text. Thank you so much, Ben. Hodinkee Rocks.
Joe Thompson, executive editor of Hodinkee, legendary watch journalist. I even have in my inbox right now, Joe is sending me more follow-up information that I managed to see just in time to get the right stats into the episode. So Joe, you rock. Thank you so much.
David: That’s amazing. Thank you as well. Big thank you to James Dowling, co-author of The Best of Time, which is I think probably we went through all the big coffee table books on Rolex and probably the best one out there. Regardless, really, really great.
Ben: I thought The Rolex Story was good by Heel.
David: That’s a good one. James was very generous with his time, especially because he was right in the middle of crunch for his deadline for his next Rolex book, The Rolex Legacy, coming out in October. So thank you James.
Also, thank you to Sleepwell Capital on Twitter, who a year ago, DMed us and was like, you guys got to do Rolex and then pointed us to a whole bunch of resources out there on the internet. That was very, very helpful.
Ben: And thank you to the over 100 people who have either in Slack or an email told us to do Rolex over the years. This is probably our most requested episode.
David: There are going to be at least 100 of you that listen to this.
Ben: To Morgan Stanley and LuxeConsult for providing the industry research report was very helpful, and always to Arvind Navaratnam at Worldly Partners for his fantastic write-up on the company that we will link to from the show notes.
If you like this episode, go check out LVMH, Hermès, or Porsche by searching in any podcast player. Listen to ACQ2 because we won’t have another episode for another month. Enjoy our conversation with Guillermo Rauch, the founder and CEO of Vercel in the meantime.
Come join the Slack, acquired.fm/slack. Hang out with all the other smart, kind members of the Acquired community. You can sign up for email updates to make sure you don’t miss corrections or trivia in the future, acquired.fm/email.
With that, listeners, we’ll see you next time.
David: We’ll see you next time.


# Transcript 2

Introduction
Patrick
Today, we're breaking down one of the strongest brands in the world, Rolex. Founded in the UK 
in 1905 under the name Wilsdorf and Davis, Rolex has become the leading name in luxury 
watches. But while the company's products are iconic, the business itself is highly secretive. 
Owned by a foundation and run as a nonprofit entity, little is known about Rolex. To unlock the 
secrets, we're delighted to be joined by Ben Clymer, the founder of Hodinkee and an expert on 
all things luxury watches. Ben has had rare access to Rolex and the people behind the 
manufacturer, making him the perfect person to dissect the business with us. Please enjoy this 
excellent breakdown of Rolex.

What Makes a Rolex Special
Patrick
So Ben, I was trying to think of an appropriate first question to break down Rolex. I think it has to 
be, what is your favorite Rolex watch ever?

Ben
Oh man, that's a really complex question for a gentleman such as myself. The Daytona is 
probably my favorite Rolex as an object. There are Rolexes that mean a lot to me from a 
sentimental point of view, being my grandfather's, my father's, et cetera. But the Daytona as 
a thing has always been the peak of my fascination from the early 6239s, which is the first 
generation Daytona back before it even said Daytona on the dial. I wrote a story probably 10 
years ago plus at this point on Hodinkee about those. There was some curiosity within Rolex 
about what they should call it. And this was before they sponsored Daytona. In the original 
name of the Cosmograph, the chronograph, for racing was Le Mans. It's called Rolex for a 
variety of reasons, but one of which is Rolex is Rolex in any language. And Le Mans, with 
that silent S, the Rolex marketing department as small as it was in 1963 said, "You know 
what? That could turn off the American market." And if you've ever tried to pronounce 
Audemars Piguet as Audemars Piaget, which is about 50% of humanity, you realize how 
uncomfortable that can be. So they quickly went to the Daytona. So the Daytona as an 
object is probably my favorite. I will say that the watch that I'm actually wearing right now, 
which was actually the first modern Rolex I've ever bought, which is the Pepsi GMT in white 
gold, I actually just realized I bought two months after we published the Inside the Rolex 
story that I wrote in 2015, is probably the one that means the most to me because I've just 
had it the longest and it was to celebrate something personal at the time.

Patrick
So say a bit more about the Daytona. What is it about it as a physical object that you think 
makes it special?

Ben
First of all, I'm a very serious car guy, or I shouldn't say I'm a serious car guy, but I love cars a 
lot. And the Daytona, not just with Rolex, but with all watches, that is about cosplay. And 
the idea of you can be whoever you want to be. I'm this quiet dork from upstate New York. 
In my mind, I'm Paul Newman and I'm driving a vintage Ferrari or vintage Porsche at Le Mans 
or something super badass. And the Daytona is the quickest way in my mind to getting 
there. And then as somebody who is obsessive about things, as you can imagine, being that 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 1 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssus, LLC.



I started a blog about watches and now here we are, the Daytona has the most interesting 
history in the sense that it is, and it was, not produced, the movement was not produced, by 
Rolex until relatively recently, in the 2000s. Whereas, everything else, almost from day one, 
was produced by Rolex. So the Dayjust, the Day-Date, the Submariner, GMP, those were all 
Rolex movements. Daytona was not, which I think is just fascinating. And it gives you 
something to do. So in younger years when I was taking the subway, I would time how long 
my subway ride was or how long it took to cook the chicken in the oven, et cetera. But 
ultimately, the idea of a professional watch, which is Rolex sports watches, with a dial that 
didn't have to be black, all the other ones are black, GMP is a black dial, Submariner's a black 
dial, aesthetically was different. It was also smaller than most of the sports watches with the 
exception of the Explorer, which is the 36 millimeter watch. And it just had a lot of story that 
went with it, one of which, of course being the fact that Paul Newman himself wore one and 
that's of course the most expensive wrist watch ever sold not for charity.

There's just so much about the Daytona, but on a personal level, it came down to the 
aesthetics, the connection to motor sport, and then just simply the story behind it of that it 
was really not a success at all. And chronographs, whether it was Rolex, Heuer or Patek, 
anybody, these were really engineering focused or motor sport focused watches. They were 
not for consumers. They were not for guys like you and me, unless we were driving at tracks 
on the weekend. And similarly, with the Submariner, which I have right here, the idea of a 
desk diver, which is somebody that sits at a desk but pretends to dive, is really a very, very 
modern, very recent introduction. And back then, you bought a Submariner if you were 
actually diving. It wasn't because I'm going to my pool in upstate New York on the 
weekends. You were really diving. Otherwise, you were buying a small dress watch. And 
whether it's Rolex or Patek or any other, Vacheron, AP, Omega, the most expensive 
watches, historically speaking, in the mid-century of last century, were not sports watches 
or not even complicated watches. They were ultra slim watches. So if you look at Patek or 
AP or Vacheron being the three big boys at high end, the most expensive watches were not 
the perpetual calendars of chronographs, they were the ultra slim watches. And that 
represented the highest end version of watchmaking at the time. We're starting to see that 
a little bit now. Actually, Richard Mille just this past week introduced the thinnest 
mechanical watch ever made and it's $2 million. And Bulgari released one earlier this year 
that was, up until last week, the thinnest watch ever made and that was about $500,000, 
where the standard Bulgari would be, say, 15. So different times, for sure.

Patrick
You said something interesting, which is one of the jobs to be done for buying a Rolex is this 
cosplay idea of transporting you to a more interesting or fanciful lifestyle. Maybe you could 
describe, before we get to Rolex specifically, the brand, all the jobs that you think high end 
watches do for people. I don't want to take for granted that one of them is tell the time, but you 
can buy a Casio for 10 bucks that can tell the time.

Ben
Or your iPhone.

Patrick
Or anything. There's lots of ways to know what time it is. So describe to me through history, and 
especially today, all the main reasons you think people buy high end watches.

Ben

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 2 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossu
, LLC.



Historically speaking, digital time telling didn't exist before 1969. Full stop. When they were 
going to the moon, it wasn't like they could buy a Casio or use an iPhone. They needed a 
mechanical watch to strap on the outside of their flight suit. When you were racing Le Mans 
or the Mille Miglia in the 1950s, again, there was no such thing as digital time keeping so you 
wore a watch to do that. The functionality of it is obvious but I think it's worth repeating 
here because a lot of people don't remember that 100 years ago, 50 years ago, 60 years 
ago, there was no option. You were wearing a watch, and it was a mechanical watch, to do 
everything in your life. And so the idea of me looking at my Rolex now and then comparing it 
to my MacBook here, there was no option to do that. Guys set this watch once with 
probably an hourly bell on the TV or the radio and that was it. And then you would just 
assume that this would be accurate for basically in perpetuity. And then beyond that, going 
back to the earliest, earliest watches, the Marie Antoinette days, and she was one of the 
first supporters of what we call haute horology, I'll say it with an American accent, which is 
high end, really beyond basic time telling devices. And what I mean by that is you can buy a 
mechanical watch, and Hodinkee sells mechanical watch for about $150. So that's probably 
a Timex, or it might be a Swatch Sistem51, which are not battery powered. These are 
mechanical watches. Those are machine assembled. They're basically disposable. You throw 
them out when they're broken. You don't fix them. There's no what we call finishing or 
finissage, which is effectively aesthetic flourishes that differentiate those type of watches 
from, say, Rolex or Omega, which I would classify as mass market luxury, but the most long 
lasting of anything out there, and then what we call haute horology, which is slightly more 
artistic. You get complications, you get finishing of movements. I don't have any here with 
me. But something like a Patek, an AP, a Vacheron, an A. Lange & Söhne, et cetera, I would 
classify those as a category, frankly, significantly higher in terms of finishing and 
significantly higher in terms of human touch than Rolex or Omega.

On a Rolex, it's a closed case back. There are no Rolexes with open case backs but there are 
some Omegas. So Rolex is the number one brand in the world. Omega is the number two 
brand in the world, historically speaking, by sales. Omegas will have some open case backs, 
on the new Speedmaster, for example, which went to the moon. You can see the 
movement. So a lot of nerds, and now more of the nerds, want to see what's actually inside 
this watch. And it's simply because you're paying six or seven grand for this thing, you want 
to know what you're getting, you want to see that human touch to it. And that is why a lot 
of people are interested in high end watch making today. More recently, and this is very 
recent, really over the past two or three years, you get people that are buying on spec, on 
speculation, on the idea that these are safe investments, which they remain to this day. And 
that is really a new thing for me. So Hodinkee, our business, is 15 years old or approaching 
15 years old, and really, nobody thought of watches as investment vehicles in 2008, 2009. I 
shouldn't say very few. Some people at the very high end. And now, it's kind of common 
practice. And I do interviews with the Bloombergs of the world and the Wall Street Journals 
of the world almost weekly at this point talking about the ROI of not just Rolex, but AP and 
Omega and TAG Heuer, et cetera. There are several reasons why somebody might buy a 
watch. And frankly, that's why it was always so compelling to me as an ex finance guy, and 
why I wanted to get in this space, was it could be interesting, we'll say, to somebody that 
works in finance from an ROI perspective. It could be interesting to somebody in design 
from an aesthetic perspective. An engineer from a manufacturing perspective. For 
somebody like me, who's an externalist, from a storytelling perspective. There's so many 
reasons why you could be interested in it, but the reasons why that people continue to buy 
is that they are so forever lasting.

This watch I've had for seven years, I've never had it serviced. And frankly, I probably won't 
need to service it for another seven years. And when my daughter, who was just born six 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 3 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colos us, LLC.



months ago, is my age, 40 years from now, she'll be able to wear this watch that I'm 
showing to you on this Zoom call right now. There's something so wonderful about the 
longevity of these things in a way nothing can replicate. And even a great car, we'll say a 
Mercedes or a Porsche or something like that, you really need to maintain those. And 
frankly, the internal combustion engine 50 years from now will probably not even be 
serviceable. Jewelry is a different thing because there's craftsmanship there. And I have a 
lot of respect for great artisans of jewelry. But there's no engineering. There's no motion 
there. And I think what's so remarkable about Rolex as the archetype, but all mechanical 
watches, is that I could put this on my wrist and if I decided to sell all my other watches, I 
could wear this every day while I sleep, while I shower, while I work out and it would 
continue to tell time for me and it would rely on me as much as I rely on it. I think there's 
something beautiful in that, that kind of symbiotic relationship between the device and the 
man. And it's just a wonderful kind of totem to a different way of living.

Building Luxury Brands
Patrick
It's such a fascinating set of different things and considerations. I'm also curious how you think 
about the luxury strategy itself from a marketing standpoint behind watches. I remember 
reading this book called The Luxury Strategy, which I recommend to anyone interested in this 
topic. And one of the ideas that stands out from that book is that when marketing a luxury 
product, you want the ratio of the number of people aware of something to those that actually 
have it to be as wide as possible. Because one of the jobs you're doing when you buy a really 
fancy watch is you want other people to know that it's a marker of success, sort of like a 
signaling function to watches. How do you think that piece of this has evolved over time?

Ben
That has become ever present and I think more so now than ever before. Just speaking of 
my own experience 15 years ago when I started Hodinkee, nobody knew what a vintage 
Rolex was. If I may say, we were the first people to give any attention at scale to vintage 
Rolex and collectible Rolexes. Basically, if you went to an auction Christie's, Sotheby's 
auction in New York, there would be about seven dealers in there and they would just be 
buying and selling amongst themselves. Now you go and it's a black tie affair with 
champagne and several well known personalities from entertainment and sports are sitting 
in the audience. It's a totally different thing. Again, we can talk about the origins of Rolex 
and how they were at the forefront of this. They were effectively the first people to have 
real marketing dollars put behind a watch. There were people that ran ads here and there, 
Longines was a big one, with Charles Lindbergh. But Rolex did it in a concerted way and 
they have continued to do that in a way that is simply just unmatched by others.

And I think what's so remarkable, Rolex was always the number one brand in the United 
States, historically speaking, from the 1950s to today. But if you look back, say, I don't know, 
15, 16 years, so pre 2008. So the financial crisis of 2008, which is actually how I started 
Hodinkee, when this all kind came to be, was a real turning point for Rolex in the US because 
when all the other brands, their competitors being Omega, which is a huge, huge brand, TAG 
Heuer, which is a good size brand, the folks that you would think, they were there, they 
were present in the conversation with Rolex. They pulled back on marketing when people 
stopped buying after 2008, when Lehman collapsed. Rolex did not. Rolex put the pedal 
down. And it was really 2008, 2009, 2010, which really elevated Rolex in the United States 
to a level that it is today. If you speak to them directly, they'll credit with that period as kind 
of the turning point for them in the US.

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 4 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l s us, LLC.



Patrick
Maybe before we go into the history, which is so interesting and really important, we could just 
do a level set for the audience on Rolex the business and just some basics like how many 
watches do they produce a year, the revenue that they produce a year, maybe say a little bit 
about their very unique business structure, which is certainly shocking to me and I think will 
shock some people too that aren't familiar with it. Just level set us on the size and type of the 
Rolex as a business.

Ben
And I want to be completely clear, and I'm sure Rolex will listen to this, so I want to be clear 
for them and for the audiences that they don't communicate anything so this is all 
speculative. The information that I'll provide and that I'm sure you read is completely 
speculative. We have a good idea of what they might produce and what the revenue might 
be. The assumption is is that Rolex is making just north of around a million watches per year 
with an average wholesale price of around $7,000. So you can do the math there to kind of 
give you an idea of size and revenue. And a million watches per year is a lot, but it's not the 
biggest by quantity. Apple, of course, would be bigger than that. Arguably, if you included 
Apple, they would be an even bigger watch brand than Rolex, but different thing obviously. 
But if you were to combine, for example, the entire Swatch group, which ranges from 
Swatch to Breguet, including Omega, it would be a larger business than Rolex, in theory. But 
again, Swatch is a publicly traded company, you can see exactly what their revenue is, 
whereas Rolex is, as I think you've alluded to, Rolex is quite the opposite. Rolex is in fact run 
by something called the Hans Wilsdorf Foundation, which was founded in 1945 when the 
founder, Hans Wilsdorf, set it up to basically be effectively, a nonprofit run by a group of 
families that are still highly involved with the business today that have, I would say, 
effectively zero public interaction. I'm pretty close with Rolex and I'm pretty close with the 
watch industry you could say and I have met, I think, one board member, one time. That was 
not by design. I think I met him at a bar and I was like, "Oh, you're so and so," and he said, 
"Yes." These people are in fact, the most powerful people in watches and nobody even 
knows their name. Nobody even knows what they look like. I happen to because this is my 
job, but most people have no clue who's really pulling the strings at Rolex. There's a 
wonderful CEO named Jean-Frederic Dufour, who used to be the president of Zenith, which 
is an LVMH brand and he is absolutely the base and brain behind much of Rolex, but there is 
a board there and like any board, they have a different kind of influence over the brand.

Rolex is effectively a nonprofit, some say one of the largest nonprofits in the world, which I 
would believe. There are dozens and dozens of rumors that you may have heard, such as 
they've got the largest private art collection next to the Vatican, or they own more real 
estate. They make more money in real estate than they do in watches. Any of those things 
could be true. What I can say with the utmost certainty is that they will never reveal any of 
that to be true, even if it is. They're not the type of brand, type of company that will ever 
stand on the rooftop and shout about anything. I mentioned this in the story that I wrote in 
2015, whereas most brands, they're trying to create stories where there aren't any, a lot of 
brands will say a watch is in-house and you manufacture it in-house when it's not. Rolex 
doesn't do any of that. In fact, what's so remarkable and I found this out on my own, doing 
my own research for that story in 2015, they will make several updates to products at some 
significant cost to themselves and not change the retail price and not even tell anybody 
about it and the only reason that I found out was when doing research for that story, I spoke 
to an independent watchmaker who is in New York City and is one of the best watchmakers 
in the country, if not the world, and he said, he works on Rolex, as well as other brands. 
These are the changes that they made to their movements without anybody knowing. By 
the way, these other brands that are communicating about LIGA, which is a manufacturing 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 5 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
loss

s, LLC.



technique that allows you to have frictionless gears, a brand sent out a press release about 
that. Then, he came to find out that Rolex had been doing that for five years. It was in half 
their watches already. That's what's so wonderful about Rolex is they just are so remarkably 
Swiss. They are so conservative and thoughtful in the way that they communicate. When I 
wrote that story in 2015, I was one of the first journalists who ever be invited inside Rolex's 
manufacturing headquarters in Bienne, Switzerland, which is what movements are made. 
They just are not out there to talk about themselves really ever. It's incredibly charming. The 
luxury world is so much about Instagram and influencers and people touting how 
prestigious any brand might be and Rolex is just quietly the most prestigious.

Patrick
It is so ridiculously singular. I cannot think of another example of a company that I want to come 
to vertical integration and quality and some of these key brand elements and real elements of a 
Rolex in the absence of a profit motive over such a long period of time. There just aren't other 
stories like this, where there's such dominance.

Ben
The only other two that come to my mind are two brands that I know of. One of which 
would be Patek Philippe, which is another family. It's owned by the Sterns completely. 
There's not any outside capital. Again, family run, Geneva, very, very close to the Rolex 
group, obviously, physically and emotionally, I should say. They continue to just do things in 
a way that is different than everybody else. Then, the other one would be Hermès, of 
course. They have some outside capital, but effectively controlled by one family, has been 
for 100 years. Hermès is part of the fashion life cycle. They are at fashion shows and they 
get into, you can buy an Hermès watch box or ash tray or lounge share or suitcase. They're a 
little bit broader, but their commitment to quality and the way that they've integrated is 
exceptional, I can say, but Patek and Rolex, I would say are unique in that way.

The History and Evolution of Rolex
Patrick
Maybe you can give us the, I don't really care how long it is, as long as you want to make it 
because it's so damn interesting, the history of Rolex, the brand and the company, its founding 
and its key timeline milestones.

Ben
Rolex is younger than most other brands. It's younger than Omega. It's younger than 
Vacheron by 150 years. It's younger than Patek. In the Swiss watch world, I wouldn't call it a 
baby by any means, but not one of these grandfathers. I mean, Vacheron was founded in 
1755. That's older than the United States of America. Rolex was founded by a guy named 
Hans Wilsdorf, who's Austrian, but he was a total anglophile. He really just was obsessed 
with the United Kingdom in the early part of the 1900s. He goes into the UK and starts a 
company called Wilsdorf & Davis in 1905. Back then, you have to remember that, forget 
digital watch making. Wrist watches were not a thing. The wrist watch was really a product 
of World War I, which was guys and trenches, trench watches, were strapping pocket 
watches to the wrist so that they didn't have to pull out of their pocket. It was a little bit 
more complex, but that's it at a high level. Wilsdorf, in 1905, decides to focus on wrist 
watches, which is crazy. I mean, it was a little bit, frankly like Elon Musk focusing on EVs 10, 
15 years ago. People just weren't ready for it. He committed to doing the wrist watch in the 
early part of the 1900s, 1905, 1908 and in 1908, he creates a company called Rolex. Again, 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 6 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssus, LLC.



there's lots of hearsay on why it's Rolex. I think at the very least it's safe to say that he chose 
that word because it's the same pronunciation in all languages. Some people say it's the 
sound it makes. There's no confirmation on that, but effectively what he does is he's just the 
distributor. He's not making anything from 1905 to about 1908.

In '08, he buys a movement, which is what powers watch from a company called Aegler, A-
E-G-L-E-R, which we'll get back to later. They're still around today, buys a movement, puts it 
in a case made by himself and sends it off to, it's called an observatory, but effectively what 
it is, it's a testing facility, effectively a nonprofit that says, these watches or time telling 
devices, clock, Marine chronometer or whatever, are accurate within, we'll say X and Y, 
effectively saying, these are the most precise time telling devices on earth, typically done 
for Marine chronometers and if you know anything about this history of longitude, like that 
is effectively how longitude was discovered. This is just paramount to basically all 
exploration of the time period. Up until that point, no wrist watches had ever even been 
submitted to this thing called the QA, which is a British testing facility at that point. In 1908, 
he does that with an Aegler powered watch. It's a 44 day test and it is given the QA 
certificate. Again, nobody had ever done it. Some years later, about 10 years later, he 
submitted 136 movements back to the QA. I think 24 of them were cased in 34 millimeter 
gold cases and then another 112 were in what we call boy size, which is really very small. I 
mean, at this point, it would look like a nickel, but these are effectively the formula one cars 
of watch movements. There were other watch movements at the time that to you and me 
and most people, would look exactly the same, but these were high performance calibers 
and they did it with a special escapement. Escapement is basically how time telling was 
regulated. These were effectively the formula one cars of watchmaking and they were done 
in a way that was very, even back then, very Rolex. There was really no indication that these 
were anything special on a dial, besides it would say QA on them. They're around. You can 
buy them today for really less than you might think.

Once he had been given the QA certificates for the first wrist watch ever, he decided really 
to focus on three tenants of watchmaking, which really were not at all prevalent in that day 
at all, because it was really about utility. The watch can tell you the time pretty well or it was 
about luxury. At that point, we're talking the Cartiers, Patek Philippes, complications, really. 
History tenants of manufacturing, which remain true to this day, would be precision, 
accuracy, waterproofness, which didn't really exist at the time, and then self winding. What I 
mean by that is ability to not have to wind the watch manually. Precision was done. We've 
covered that. These watches were based on QA. They came up with a new escapement to 
make them more precise. Waterproofness, I think, goes back to the question you asked 
about five minutes ago, which is, how did you get something that more people know about 
that basically can afford or confine? He created something called the oyster case and now 
almost all Rolexes with the exception of the Cellini line, use an oyster case. That basically 
just means a waterproof case. Nobody was doing it at the time. Omega had something that 
was pretty close and actually predates the oyster case, but never really took off in the same 
way. Instead of using seals, it was almost like a locking system. It didn't really take off, but 
effectively there was this woman named Mercedes Gleitz, who was a typist, of all things, 
basically a secretary in the UK and she had swum the English channel successfully, the first 
woman to swim the English channel successfully.

Hans Wilsdorf, the founder said, "Hey, wouldn't it be cool if this woman, A, she's a woman, B, 
she's doing this amazing feat that no one had ever done before. Wouldn't it be cool if she 
wore the watch around her neck?" She didn't wear it on her wrist to be clear. She put her 
around her neck and she attempted to swim the English channel. She actually didn't 
successfully do it. She failed, but nobody really cared because she had already done it 
before. He took out an ad celebrating the fact that this watch was around this woman's 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 7 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



neck for 10 hours in the English channel and the time keeping was flawless. That solidified 
Rolex as A, a household name because the oyster case had been validated in the English 
channel with this early brand ambassador, I guess you would call her. That was a huge deal 
and I think one of the earliest examples of real marketing by any luxury brand or any brand 
really at all, and then the final tenant would be self winding, which is, I would equate it to the 
automatic transmission. When the automatic transmission came around, all of a sudden, 
driving a car became a hell of a lot easier. It just became wider accepted, et cetera. Prior to, 
I guess it was around 19, I'm going to say, 30 something that Rolex patented the first self 
winding movement. To be clear, there was somebody called John Harwood that actually had 
a different self winding movement first. I think that was in the twenties and his idea was to 
make a hammer. Some of them would bounce back and forth like this to continue to power 
the watch. Rolex said, let's go a different array. Let's create a rotor, so a weight that would 
oscillate around inner circle to power the watch.

That worked and Rolex had, actually I remember the date. It was 1933 because it had a 20 
year patent on it and Patek Philippe, which was another stall watch of traditional 
watchmaking, saw this and said, "Oh shit, we need to do that too," but they couldn't actually 
release anything until 20 years later because of the patent. The Patek 2526, which is their 
first self winding watch that came out in 1953. That's a different thing all together, but 
effectively, Hans Wilsdorf said, "I want the watches to be precise," check with the QA. "I 
want them to be waterproof," check with the oyster case, "And I want them to be self 
winding," check with the perpetual. If you see oyster perpetual on any Rolex, which you'd 
see in all Rolexes now, oysters are waterproof. Perpetual is the self winding. From there, 
Rolex went out to make watches and they were doing things very much in a similar style to 
everyone else at that time until the early fifties. In the post-war era, post World War II era, 
they created their first sports watch. By sports watch, the technical term is professional 
watch by Rolex nomenclature. It's the Submariner, which is the diver's watch, which is 1953. 
It's the GMT, which is the pilot's watch, which is 1955. Explorer I, which is an Explorer's 
watch or an all day everyday watch, which is 53 as well. Then, you had the Daytona in 1963. 
Later, you had the Sea-Dweller in 67, which is a beef up version of the Sub. Then, the 
Explorer II in, I guess, 1970 or so. Those are the watches that I think most people now think 
of when they think of watch. You see rotating bezel in most cases. You see a black dial in 
most cases. You see an oyster bracelet, which is a very wonderfully produced bracelet with 
an oyster lock bracelet. That is really when things change.

To be clear, Rolex was not alone. There were other brands doing it. Some would say earlier, 
some would say around the same time, but the Blancpain Fifty Fathoms is credited to 1953. 
The Omega Seamaster 300 and 120 are around the same time as well. They were not alone 
and you have to remember that even Rolex in the watch industry in that period, it was really 
a smattering of different suppliers. If you look at, for example, and I wrote about this several 
times over the past few years, if you look at, say the Rolex Daytona from 1963 and the Heuer 
Carrera from 1963, it uses the exact same movement and I'm saying the exact same 
movement, and that's a Valjoux 72. Same case maker, same dial maker, same hand maker. 
What is the actual difference? The assembly was done by Rolex and the assembly was done 
by Heuer, but the product itself was really very similar. If you look at early Seamasters and 
early Submariners, a lot of similarity there. The difference was of course the oyster case, but 
that was how watch making was done. If you look at say, example of Patek Philippe 2499, 
that's based on a Valjoux movement. You don't think of that. You think of Patek as Patek. 
This is the holy grail, but up until really, I mean the 2000s, they were using what you call an 
Ebauche movement, which is just really movement blank and then, it would be finished by 
Patek or finished by AP or Vacheron or whoever. Rolexes were really, I would say, finished to 
a higher quality than most, but I mean, any good Blancpain or any good Omega would do 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 8 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



much of what Rolex was doing. It was really not until much, much later in the seventies first 
when we had the Quartz crisis, which is effectively the creation of Quartz, which is analog 
time, but with a battery, which is dramatically more precise, I mean, dramatically more 
precise than mechanical watch making.

What is interesting to think about, and I give full credit to my old colleague, Joe Thompson, 
who's the legend in the watch writing world, is the Japanese came in with Quartz, Seiko 
created it, effectively, came in and there was a war between Swiss mechanical watch 
making and Quartz analog timekeeping. To be clear, the Swiss lost. The Swiss lost by a 
country mile. All of a sudden, those guys that were buying a Rolex or Omega or a Heuer, 
because they were the most precise thing in the world just said, "You know what" why 
would I do that? I can buy a Quartz watch that is 10 times more accurate," 10 times, and by 
the way, you don't need to have good service. You just swap out the new battery or 
whatever all the time and that decimated the Swiss watch industry to a point where very, 
very few brands were producing things at a profit of any kind. Jack Heuer, whose family 
owned TAG Heuer before it was TAG. It was just Heuer at the time. In his biography, I mean, 
he talks almost going into bankruptcy. If you talk to Gerry Stern, whose father Philippe Stern 
and his grandfather have owned Patek for generations. In the late seventies, they had to 
borrow with their bank.

Patrick
It's existential.

Ben
Yeah, this was real. It wasn't just the smaller brands. Patek had issues. Heuer had issues. 
Rolex was really smart in that, through that period of real turmoil when, I would say, their 
chief competitor Omega decided to make some Quartz watches, decided to make some 
funky looking things, Rolex stayed the course, and yes, they did make Quartz watches. The 
Beta 21, which was a Swiss conglomerates answer to Quartz, is the most expensive Quartz 
watch ever made. I mean like thousands and thousands of dollars, they said, "We're going to 
focus on what we do best," and the focus went away from precision and accuracy and time 
telling to luxury. That is when you start seeing the gold Rolex on, I hate to say it, but the 
used car salesman and the gold Rolex became the thing, seventies and eighties, opulence, 
you understand what the eighties were, of course. It just changed what Rolex was, but by 
the way, it worked and it allowed them to continue to be relevant when everybody else 
being Omega, Patek to a degree, Vacheron, these brands really struggled. That is why so 
many of them ended up in conglomerates. In the eighties and nineties, when watches were, 
mechanical watches, were really not doing so hot, a lot of folks came in and bundled them 
all up. Richemont owns a bunch of the great ones, including Vacheron. Swatch owns 
everything from Swatch to Blancpain, Breguet, Omega. It was a time of great challenge for 
sure. Rolex, they struggled as well, never to the degree that the others did, but it was not 
great for them. Then, the nineties started to come around and Rolex had a CEO by the name 
of Patrick Heiniger. His father was actually also CEO too, to give you an idea of how things 
work at Rolex. And he said, "I want to take Rolex in-house," and he was really the first to do, 
frankly well before Patek or well before anybody else. Rolex was using 27 different suppliers 
to make, say, Submariner.

After he was done with it, they're using four and now, those four are completely owned by 
Rolex. There are four different production facilities, two in Geneva, one in, what I would call, 
Proper Geneva one and Plan-les-Ouates, which is a little bit outside and then there's one in 
Chêne-Bourg, which does dials and there's one in Bienne, which makes the movements. 
What's so amazing is, Rolex, to me, the secret sauce is equal parts case, equal parts 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 9 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ss

s, LLC.



movement. The case is, you can reverse engineer if you're a competitor and say, "Okay, 
what's an oyster case? It's got this. It's got that. It's polished there. Seals are done by X, Y, 
and Z." Movements are a different thing entirely. And what's amazing is Rolex Geneva, 
which is basically dials, cases, bracelets, all that stuff, and Rolex BN, which is up in the 
mountains in Vallée de Joux, had a handshake deal for 70 years. And I mean, an actual 
handshake deal that the calibers made by what was then called Aegler, who made the first 
movement for Hans Wilsdorf, that company was making movements solely for Rolex 
Geneva based on nothing but a handshake. And I mean that literally. There was nothing in 
writing up until 2004, which is just insane to think about. I mean, Rolex was certainly a 
multi-billion dollar a year business before then. And up until 2004, there was no contract in 
place to say that Aegler couldn't make movements for Omega or TAG Heuer or whoever. 
And so in 2004, Rolex said, "You know what? Enough's enough. Let's get married here," and 
they purchased the company. And so now Rolex BN is basically what Aegler was up in the 
mountains until 2004. And so Rolex now has four different production facilities. As I wrote 
that story, I was among the first to be invited inside the movement manufacturing, which is 
really the source of the IP. That is where the sausage is made, so to speak. Just remarkable. 
If you haven't read the story, it's on Hodinkee called Inside The Manufacturer: Visiting All 
Four Rolex Locations. It was remarkable. As I started out in that story, this was 10 years ago 
or seven years ago, I was a lover of watches.

I was a lover of Rolex and I had four Rolexes then than had anything else at that point. None 
of them were as old as I was. They were all considerably older than me. And it's funny, I 
reread the story to prepare for this interview. And now since then, I've bought more modern 
Rolexes than I have vintage. And the world is just a different place. But once you see 
everything that Rolex does to a watch, and what I mean by that is the fact that they have 
their own foundry, even the steel, not just the gold and precious metals, even the steel on 
Rolex is proprietary and it's made by Rolex. It's 904L. It's wild. They make their own gold. It's 
called Everose if it Rolex gold. It's just remarkable. And what I think is even more telling of 
what Rolex is about is that one of their facilities they actually have, and I mean this literally, 
more than two Nobel prize-winning scientists on staff working on watches. Think about 
what that must mean from a material science perspective. The innovation done by Rolex is 
just above and beyond anything I've seen. I've been to every watch maker in the world. I've 
been to several car manufacturers doing this. I've been all over. I've been inside Hermès. 
There's just nothing like this. They create machines to test their machines that make 
watches. They have their own oyster test, which of course provides artificial pressure on a 
watch to know that it's waterproof. They have a machine that can open and close a Rolex 
clasp a thousand times a minute, which is kind of amazing, because you actually have to 
open. It's wild. So, you open this. It's actually kind difficult to do. Imagine doing that a 
thousand times a minute. They invented a machine to do that. They have a machine in 
Chêne-Bourg, which is their dial and gem-setting location, to sort through all the stones 
that they're given. First of all, Rolex only works with IF, which is internally flawless stones, 
which is obviously the most expensive, highest end. To ensure that the stones that they're 
given, whether it's diamonds or rubies or anything are real, they created a machine to sort 
them at scale and ensure that all of them are real. And I said, "Well, are bad stones or fake 
stones are real problem for you?"

They said, "No, not really. But we just want to ensure that every watch we sell is what we 
want it to be." And I was like, "How often do you get a fake diamond or a fake anything?" 
And the answer was, "One out of 10 million." To be clear, this machine was created either by 
them or they paid somebody to make it for them. This is their machine. It's not like it exists 
outside Rolex. And this gives you an idea of what they're about and how they do things. And 
it is so wonderful and so different than traditional luxury, which frankly, I may say, even as a 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 10 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
los us, LLC.



purveyor of luxury items, is full of shit half the time. I'm into sneakers, but not in the way that 
I'm into other things. Why would a pair of so special edition sneakers sell for $5,000? 
Sneakers are made in China by machines. They're hand- stitched here and there. It's just 
designed. It's artificial scarcity, et cetera. When you see what goes into a, really, any high-
end mechanical watch, but in particular Rolex, you really start to understand. The 
Submariner, we'll say, is 8,000 bucks. That might be a deal after you see what goes into this 
thing. And I mentioned in the story, several competing brand presidents had told me before 
I went on this trip that, "Oh, not a human hand touches a Rolex before it's made. It's all done 
by machine." Which is effectively the most insulting thing a Swiss person can say, meaning 
that it's void of character. It's void of humanity. It's like luxury should be about people. It 
should be about craftsmanship. And they're saying, "Rolex doesn't have any of that." And I 
was like, "Oh, okay. That's kind of a bummer." That may have informed why I didn't own any 
modern Rolex at the time. You walk into Rolex HQ in Geneva and you see hundreds of 
people finishing watches. And they're not finishing in the same way Patek or Lange would, 
by hand with little pieces of wood. They're finishing maybe six or seven Rolexes at a time on 
a polishing wheel, but they're still polishing really the way that it should be done.

They're assembling dials by hand. They're assembling the bracelet by hand. There's an 
incredible amount of hand work that goes into the most basic of Rolex, being like a 
Submariner or a Datejust. Beyond that, what's so fun about them is they know exactly how 
different they are than everyone else. They also know that everyone wants to be like them. 
So, at at least two of their four facilities you might drive by and say, "Oh, there's Rolex. It's 
five stories high. It's, I don't know, a few hundred thousand square feet." When you go 
inside, you realize that it's actually 10 or 11 stories high, but five or six of those stories are 
below ground. And I just remember thinking, "Why would they do that? What's the point of 
that?" And it was in fact to suggest to anybody that drives by that Rolex is smaller than they 
actually are. And I think if we had any idea of how big the foundation was, it would blow all 
of us away. I think it's enormous. I think they're probably producing more than a million a 
year, but that's the generally accepted number. It's who they are. And if they're going to do 
something, they want to do things at the highest level. I'm a golfer and have been lucky 
enough to meet some of their players. And Adam Scott became a good friend and I asked, 
"Why don't you sponsor X, Y, and Z?" or, "Why don't you go grassroots?" Whatever. And 
they said, "This is Rolex like my golf. If we're going to do golf, we only want to be involved 
with the majors. So, the US Open, the BJ Championship, the Masters, and of course the 
British Open. And that's it." If they're going to do tennis, it's going to be Wimbledon and the 
US Open. They don't even want to mess with some of the other majors in tennis. It's just 
remarkable how committed they are to working with the very best. It's wild. It really is.

Rolex's Marketing and Distribution Secrets
Patrick
It's an unbelievable story. And also it's amazing to me the commitment to quality over time. And 
I'm sure there's incredible pressure for all sorts of reasons, maybe the non for profit thing is 
actually a benefit here, but there's always pressure to skimp a little bit on quality, right? Like give 
up the absolute perfect standard, because it could mean a lot more sales or a lot more scale or 
whatever. And they just haven't done it. So, you could think about buying one and looking at it 
and having it be a reminder of this commitment, all the way down to the gold. The fact that they 
own all the way down to the bare metals in the ground is crazy. As you think about their genius 
on, I guess, quality and manufacturing, what is the equivalent on the marketing and distribution 
side? So, you mentioned the great example of the woman swimming across the channel as a 
marque event that made a big splash, and they're focused on the upper echelon of whatever 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 11 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossu
, LLC.



they're doing. What else do you think Rolex can teach the world's companies about unbelievable 
marketing or distribution?

Ben
Referencing slightly what I was just mentioning, that commitment to only working with the 
absolute best and forgoing opportunity, foregoing working with the next generation of, we'll 
say golfers in this case, the guys that are coming up now, until they've been validated as the 
very best, then they're just not interested. And good work if you can get it. Not everyone 
has the benefit of being able to say, "I want to work with Tiger Woods, therefore Tiger 
Woods will work with me." But I think they are just so unrelenting to their pursuit of 
excellence in the literal sense, the very best in the world, no matter what it is. It's Yo-Yo Ma. 
It's not the person that has played Carnegie hall twice. It's Yo-Yo Ma. It's Roger Federer in 
the tennis world. What's so amazing is they care about the people as much as they do the 
results. And Roger, I think, is the ultimate archetype for the Rolex. They call them Rolex 
testimonies. They don't call them ambassadors. Roger is, I wouldn't be ashamed to say, I 
think Roger's a hero to many of us. And I'm not really even a tennis player, a tennis fan. Just 
the way he-

Patrick
His character.

Ben
... floats above the air. Yeah. He floats above the air, no matter what room that he's in. He's 
just a gentleman and he married his high school sweetheart. He's just a wonder. And I've 
met him through Rolex and he is just a delightful person and completely authentic. They 
look at that. They want to be associated with people that are not only the best, but are 
genuinely good people as well. And again, good work if you can get it or it would be nice to 
only work with the best people that are also the best performers, but they really maintain 
with that. And their partnerships are different. I'm trying to think of an example. I'll say 
Leonardo DiCaprio. He's been an ambassador for TAG Heuer. He's been an ambassador, I 
think, for IWC. He is a hyper-famous, hyper-talented person. He doesn't care. That's just 
money for him, et cetera. The contracts he's had with, let's with, with TAG Heuer probably 
lasted five years. Rolex has worked with Jack Nicklaus since 1967. 1967. They work with him 
to this day. He's still very much alive and he's had a bunch of Rolexes. We did a video with 
him. But I mean, think about that deal. 1967 to 2022. That's just wild. Omega does that to a 
degree. They've had a partnership with Cindy Crawford since the early '90s, and now Kaia 
Gerber's with Omega. It's not an official ambassadorship. It's a much longer term thing, but 
Rolex really takes it to the next level. And they've been with Roger for his entire career.

They really are committed to long-term meaningful relationships, much more so than any 
other brand. It's not like with some of these luxury brands or car companies where, okay, 
"New CEO. I believe in tennis and equestrian." Then he gets let go and the new guy comes in 
and, "I believe in sailing and motor sports." It's not like that at all. There are core tenants of 
Rolex, motor sport is in fact one of them, then that's it. They're not playing in the NBA. 
They're not sponsoring baseball. They're not sponsoring the NFL. They're doing the things 
that they do, which is equestrian, sailing to a degree. It's motor sports, tennis, and golf. And 
it's just amazing that these strategies continue to deliver decade after decade. What was 
golf in 1967? I actually don't know the answer, but I can tell you it was probably not a big 
deal, especially back then. And the fact that they were committed back then and they're 
even more committed now is just remarkable.

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 12 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l s us, LLC.



Patrick
What have you learned about maybe the way that they make decisions, obviously being so long-
term oriented is one of those things, that again you think is most portable to other either luxury 
brands or just businesses in general, based on how singular they seem to be and how they make 
their choices?

Ben
It's kind of silly, but it's almost too simple, I should say. And I think it's ultimately this adage 
of, "Do the right thing." They're creating products that deliver in a way that is so far beyond, 
I think, what people understand that people would be shocked. The way that I used to 
process, I used to write for the site. I don't anymore. But as a journalist, I went to journalism 
school. I would say two types of companies, one of which is the more you learn about the 
company, the less you like them, the less you respect them. And frankly, that's a lot of luxury 
companies. You realize that, "Okay, this Swiss-made watch is actually made in China. This 
bag is actually not hand-sewn, it's sewn by machine." Little things like that. And then there 
are other companies where the more you learn about them, the more you like them. Rolex is 
the archetype of that. That article that I wrote in 2015, that was a foundational shift in my 
opinion of how watches should be made, mass luxury watches. And I think they continued 
to innovate in a way that we at Hodinkee continue to strive to be like. I mean, as an example, 
they have two in-house components that nobody knows about, or very few people know 
about. One of them is called Parachrom, which is a balance wheel, which is literally the thing 
that rotates inside the watch. There was basically, I wouldn't call it a monopoly, but pretty 
damn close to a monopoly on getting those things. And everybody from Patek to Rolex 
were using something called the Nivarox balance wheel. And Rolex said, "You know what? 
We're going to make our own at some astronomical cost, and it's going to be 10 times as 
accurate as the competitor." And they did that. And that's one of the few times they 
actually communicated on a technical innovation.

They also have their own shock absorbing system, I think it's called Paraflex, that again, 50% 
more absorbent than your traditional shock absorbent system. Would that change? Would 
that stop you or me or the guy on the street from buying a Rolex if they didn't? Not at all. 
Not at all. But they do it because they should. And they are at the core of it. What's so 
charming about them at the core of it is they are master marketers, master everything, 
master distributors, but they are watchmakers at the core of it. The Submariner, this GMP, 
this anything, I would put against any watch in the world in terms of production ability. The 
other thing I should say is that they know what they're good at and they know what they're 
not. And Rolex does not sell watches. Rolex makes watches. They own exactly, and it may 
have even closed, I should check, I'll back-check this afterwards, Rolex owns one retail store. 
One. And Patek follows a similar model. They have, I think, four. They have London, Paris, 
Geneva, and I think Hong Kong. Rolex has one, and I actually think it may have closed, and 
it's in Switzerland. And that's simply because they had a, it was basically a family friend type 
situation that owned it, then they ended up acquiring it. So, if you go to the Rolex boutique 
in Manhattan, for example, which is in the Rolex building, that's not owned by Rolex. That's 
owned by Wempe, which is a great authorized dealer. It's actually right up the road. It's a 
German-based company. If you go to the Rolex boutique in Singapore, it's either The Hour 
Glass or another authorized dealer. So, they're not selling watches. They're selling them at 
wholesale to retailers who then make between, we'll say, 20 and 50% on every product they 
sell. And imagine your Rolex, right?

You're thinking that you've got more demand than you could possibly ever supply. And 
you're thinking, "Man, I'm giving away 20 to 50% of everything I sell. Why don't we just do 
that?" And they don't change. Because they know that first of all, everything's cyclical. The 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 13 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col
su

, LLC.



watch market is going through a boom unlike I've ever seen in 14 years of doing this, unlike 
the market's ever seen at all. That may or may not last. We've reached a shift where things 
will never go back to the way they were before, but things are softening up a little bit. And 
they realize, "Hey, we make watches. We don't sell them." And to have the self-control and 
the wherewithal to basically walk away from 20 to 50% of retail sales at that scale globally 
when the demand is just capacious is just so admirable. And because they know that in 100 
years, maybe things will change or maybe in 10 years, things will change. It wasn't really 
Rolex, but in 2014 or '15, around the same time that I went to go see them in Geneva, 
something called the Apple Watch came out. And Rolex is Rolex. They're going to be fine. 
But a lot of the other brands were like, "Man, is this going to eat our lunch?" And to be clear, 
it did. If you want to say apple's to apples, the Apple Watch is a bigger watch than Rolex by 
quantity and by revenue. But Rolex is obviously fine. It has changed, and this is not an Apple 
Watch segment but I'll just mention it briefly, it has changed how people buy luxury 
watches. The luxury watch pre-Apple Watch I would consider $1,000 and above. Maybe 
even $500 and above. It has decimated that market. So, the market between 500 and 
sub-5,000 has just been destroyed. The brands like Shinola and Fossil. Fossil was a multi, 
multi-billion dollar company. I mean, just enormous. Their share-

Patrick
You don't hear that name anymore. Yeah.

Ben
Exactly. Their share price in 2013, '14 pre-Apple Watch was $80 a share. But last time I 
checked, it was eight. Probably even lower than that now. They've lost 90% of their market 
cap. Apple Watch has, in some ways, helped the Rolexes and the Omega's of the world 
because Rolex and Omega and TAG Heuer, they are luxury to most people. They're clearly 
expensive. They start around 5,000 bucks instead of around one, like some of the other 
folks do. That's the baseline now. Now, you want a Rolex, Omega, TAG Heuer or above or 
nothing. You don't want the Shinola anymore. You don't want the Fossil anymore. And I think 
Apple Watch was a big, big player in that.

Patrick
Maybe say a bit, obviously we don't have the data on Rolex specifically, but just from what you 
know about the watch industry, about the income statement of a watch brand. Are they very 
high gross margin, like a lot of luxury products?

Ben
They are.

Patrick
How are they typically distributed? Anything interesting there that you think maps back onto 
Rolex. This is Business Breakdown. It's not just product breakdowns, although here the product 
is way more interesting. Anything worth mentioning there, just in how the business itself works 
that's unique?

Ben
Rolex is more vertically integrated than most. Once you absorb the cost of acquiring and 
bring everything in-house, you would assume that the margin would be a little bit higher 
because they're making everything themselves. Historically and generally speaking, there 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 14 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Coloss
, LLC.



are very few brands that are as vertically integrated as Rolex. Weirdly, Seiko would be one 
brand. Seiko would be one. Patek would be another. But most brands are buying effectively 
everything. The component, the movement might be an in-house design. I'm using air 
quotes here. In-house design, but they're buying EBOS base calibers and modifying them 
significantly. There's margin there. They have to buy the products, to this day, or at least 
back in 2015, Rolex actually did not manufacture their own hands. I don't know why, but 
they were buying that from a company, I forgot the name of it. I think Fiedler SA. So Rolex 
was buying crystals in hands, but nothing else. Most brands are buying pretty much 
everything and then they're assembling it and putting it together. So then it just becomes 
like, okay, the production costs watch is the raw materials. It's the man hours. It's the straps. 
It's all that stuff. And then they would ship it out to a U.S. distributor at generally, probably 
about, I would say, 40% of what you'll see in the stores. So 40% of U.S. retail. And then the 
distributor would take 20% and then the retailer would take about 40% of that. So you can 
assume that your retailer is buying stuff at about 40% below what you're paying. And then 
the distributor is taking 20% of that. And then the actual producer of the watch is probably 
making 200% on that.

What Rolex Can Teach Us About Business
Patrick
If you think about Rolex specifically, great watchmakers, in general, what do you think are the 
most important overall business lessons where you've seen how, let's say, Rolex specifically 
works at a base level. You've walked the factory floors. You're intimately familiar with the 
products. And then when you start thinking about other product categories, whatever, it doesn't 
need to just be luxury goods, what do you wish more businesses did or a certain way that they 
conducted themselves most based on what you've learned about Rolex?

Ben
I think continuity of design is paramount. That is probably really a simple thought. If you look 
at the Submariner I have on my desk, I have a 1954 Submariner and it looks pretty much like 
this. I have one from 1965 that looks just like this. And the idea that you can create a 
consumer good, and in fact, a completely superfluous kind of unnecessary consumer good, 
that becomes iconic, is everything. And if you look at its competitors, look at Omega, the 
Speedmaster, the washer went the moon, that is by far its most iconic product. And 
because they're making the Speedmaster just like they did in the 1960s, that is why it 
continues to have the following that it does. Look at cars. Porsche 911. 911s are trading well 
above retail right now for a variety of reasons. Wasn't always the case, but now they are. 
And you look at the Hermès Birkin bag. And it's just sticking with luxury. That bag has been 
around for 40 years and it will always be the iconic women's high end bag. So continuity of 
design, and we just did a podcast on this on Hodinkee, I think really is what creates multi-
generational demand. And I think with watches in particular, my origin story is I was given an 
Omega Speedmaster by my maternal grandfather, who was my hero, and that watch 
continues in some form or another to be made today. And so when my daughter who's on 
the other side of this wall, who's six months old, again is 25 or something I can say, "Hey, 
Georgie." That's her name. "Let's go out and get a watch that looks just like Dad's, that'll look 
just like your great-grandfather's, who you never met." And there's something really 
wonderful about that. Because, again, these are multi-generational items. Thinking long 
term, which is what Rolex does... Rolex is planning. I can guarantee they have their product 
mix figured out for 2035, guaranteed. Being able to not have to answer to shareholders, like 
so many of us do, and play for the long ball, I think is intoxicating for somebody like me. For 
example, in 2013, it was the 50th anniversary of the Daytona. At that point, the watch was a 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 15 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col s u
 LLC.



steel watch with a steel bezel.

All people wanted was a black bezel. That's it. That was all we were looking for. It wasn't too 
much to ask for. They didn't give it to us. They waited another two years. They gave us a 
platinum Daytona with a color bezel. It was kind of brown, ceramic bezel. And I just said, 
"Man, that's kind of shitty. 50th anniversary, they're not going to give us the thing that we 
want?" And it's just a black bezel. It doesn't seem like much. And then when the watch came 
out in 2015, we all said, "Great," and we're celebrating it, and that kind of set off a 
pandemonium. But they do these iterative things where like that black bezel now exists on 
the gold version of the Daytona, but not on a bracelet. And so if you want to buy a black 
bezel on a gold Daytona, it comes on a rubber strap. And I guarantee you next year, the year 
after that, we're going to get it on the bracelet. This idea of iterating to a degree that is so 
frustrating almost for the consumer, but it makes you so excited. And by the way, I want the 
gold Daytona on the bracelet with the black bezel. But because it didn't come out on the 
bracelet, I bought it on the rubber strap, even though it's not even really what I wanted. 
When it comes down the bracelet, I'm going to buy that, too. And the idea that they've 
created demand for product that people will buy several iterations of basically... This is not 
basically, really the same thing, is just super admirable. That somebody that creates 
products, which is what we do sometimes at Hodinkee, to do things in that level of detail 
and continue to foster the demand that far out base of supply is just remarkable. But again, 
doing things in a way that is not shouting from rooftops, but the quality is there, and for 
people like me who know a lot about this product in particular, I can look you or anybody in 
the eye and say, "Yeah, if you can afford this watch, it's a great fucking product."

Patrick
What other brands in your world would you encourage people to study in this kind of detail to 
learn interesting lessons?

Ben
The other brand that I've mentioned a lot in this episode here is Omega. And I think Omega 
now is doing... They've learned a lot from Rolex, if I can say, and nobody's told me that, but I 
can just see it. The Omega Speedmaster, which went to the moon organically, it's not like 
they paid NASA for that, that is the greatest achievement of humankind. We sent men to 
the moon. It's insane. And there was a Rolex, to be clear, in contention for that, and NASA 
chose the Speedmaster over it. And that's just the facts. And so the Speedmaster was not, 
believe it or not, the commercial stalwart that it is for Omega now. Up until probably five 
years ago, it was the Seamaster. It was a dive watch. And Omega is actually a larger brand in 
China than Rolex is, believe it or not. They were driven by Chinese consumers. It was a lot of 
different colors and kind of interesting things. Then all of a sudden, the current president, a 
guy named Raynald Aeschlimann came in and said, "You know what? The Speedmaster is 
iconic. The Speedmaster went to the god damned moon. This should be the thing that 
people go crazy for. And this should be the product that can compete with Rolex. And they 
started doing these special editions, these limited editions, one of which was to celebrate 
15 years of Hodinkee. They did them with some other folks here and there. They did one 
with the Porsche Club of America. They did some special things with Snoopy, which is a tile 
of NASA. And then they stopped. They stopped. So no more limited editions, really. They do 
different editions, but not limited.

And now all of a sudden, the Speedmaster trades above retail. The Speedmaster is what 
everybody wants. And we're an authorized dealer from Omega and we can't keep them in 
stock. And so you look at the Omega Speedmaster, which, 10 years ago, was really kind of a 
secondary product. And now it's a primary product for the second biggest brand of the 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 16 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col s us, LLC.



world, who sponsors the Olympics and James Bond and all these iconic things, and they're 
really paying attention to the enthusiast, which Hodinkee represents, which is who I 
represent, and the mass market folks, which is just the guy that wants a nice thing. I think 
Rolex has frustrated a lot of people, and this is no news to them. I know they know because 
you can no longer go in and buy the watch you want at all. And historically, the Daytona was 
always kind of difficult to get, but as a 25 year old guy that used to work in finance, which is 
when I started at Hodinkee, you make your first $5,000 bonus or whatever, and you go into 
the store and you buy your Submariner and like, "Okay, I'm an adult now. I have a 
Submariner." That doesn't exist anymore. And I think that's a real bummer for a lot of folks. 
And that certainly has made the aftermarket price of these things going in a significant way, 
but it really turns a lot of people off and Omega, TAG Heuer, Panerai, a lot of brands who 
really said, "You know what? If you can't get that Submariner, we'd be happy to sell you a 
watch. And by the way, here's some champagne and we're going to invite you to our next 
party and you might enjoy it."

Look, Rolex is an exceptional brand. I would never say they're not. I spent the last hour 
telling you why they're exceptional, but these are just watches. I think we have to remember 
that. I'm the first person to say that nobody needs a watch. So no doctor is prescribing us to 
buy watches. We're not curing cancer here. And so if somebody has worked so hard that 
they can afford a $10,000 Rolex and Rolex says, "Sorry, you can't have one," that's a really 
frustrating experience. And X percent of you says, "Well, maybe I just want you more now," 
but Y percent of you kind of says, "Well, you know what? Screw you, man. I'm going to go 
buy an Omega. I'm going to go buy a Panerai. And I'm going to love them and they're going 
to love me." It's just a matter of how much kind of ego there is involved there. Some people 
don't care at all. But I can tell you without question that several people that I know 
personally have been turned off, not only from Rolex, Patek, and Richard Mille and AP, 
because these are phenomenally expensive things. Rolex is on the low end side there. Let's 
talk about AP, which the watch you want is probably $30,000. Now, what you might want is 
$150,000, but to walk into a store and say, "Hey, my name's Ben. I've got $150,000 ready to 
go. I want to buy this thing," and be told, "Sorry. No. Who are you? Can I see your Instagram 
feed? What do you do for a living? Who do you know?"

How insulting must that be. And the answer is really fucking insulting to a lot of people. And 
a lot of people say, You know what? Fuck you. I'm just going to go buy it for $500 on a pre-
owned site, or I'm just going to not buy it at all. I'm going to take a nice vacation or buy a 
Ferrari instead." And I think this industry has really struggled with that. The market has been 
so buoyed by easy access to capital, I'll say, and the prices have just continued to go up and 
go up in a way... It's not normal. And it's not just true for watches. It's true for cars, wine, art, 
et cetera. And all of a sudden, when things tightened up a little bit this year, which they 
have people said, "Oh, wait a minute. Rolexes will not always go up value? Then I'm out. I'm 
just going to sell it." That's a shame. And I think, not just Rolex, but all luxury brands who 
have their chest puffed out really broadly now should just remember that everything is 
cyclical, and that if you have somebody that wants to buy a product from you that nobody 
needs, you should give them as much respect as possible because it doesn't last forever.

Patrick
We've talked a lot about the wonderful aspects of Rolex and some of these brands in general. 
What are maybe some negative lessons, things that you've seen them do through history, not 
just Rolex, but other brands like it, do you think are good, valuable lessons of what not to do? 
You've mentioned one there, which is what sparks my question.

Ben

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 17 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



The weakest link of any chain is always retail. Finding people, good sales people, is 
remarkably hard because you're selling stuff. And a lot of the folks that are able to afford 
this stuff, frankly, are incredibly intelligent, incredibly well versed in the world, know 
everything, know everyone. If they don't, they're going to go on Hodinkee and read all about 
it so they do know everything. And you get salespeople that aren't used to that. And I think 
you have people that are selling product in a way that is so counter to what these things 
represent. Just using what I have on my desk as an example. I bought this GMT with a good 
friend of mine. He had just signed a deal to play in a band, a very famous band. And I had 
just signed my seed ground in fundraising for Hodinkee, which was a huge deal for me. And 
we went into the Rolex store on Fifth Avenue. We bought the exact same watch together. 
So this watch has nothing to do with how much it costs or anything. It has everything to do 
with that success in my life, that success in my friend's life. And to be told, "No," in that 
moment, imagine we were there together trying to celebrate these achievements for both 
of us. And we were like, "Sorry, you can't have anything." And at that point, there were two 
of the exact same watch sitting in the case so it was easy. But right now, if we were to do it 
again, we'd probably get told, "No." It's so, so demoralizing and insulting. I hesitate to use 
the word enemy, but you could create an enemy for life as a consumer. That is crazy.

Rolex knows it's a problem and they are doing everything they can to meet it. And I believe 
them when they tell me that they're creating more watches than ever before so that 
demand paces it. But there needs to be a better way. And frankly, I don't know what that 
way is. Maybe it's eCommerce. I'm a believer in that. I don't know. Maybe it's actual waiting 
lists, where people can actually put their name down and say, "Okay, this person's at number 
1,123." When you get to that thing, you'll get the watch. That doesn't exist. And the idea that 
the waiting lists are even referenced by Rolex today is nonsense. There's no such thing. If 
you know somebody at Rolex, you'll get the watch. If you bought a bunch of watches that 
they can't sell, then you'll get the one that they can sell. It's a gift basically. And again, I want 
to be clear. Rolex is not alone. Several brands that are very hot right now are doing the same 
thing. But man, both my parents were teachers. The fact that I have more than one Rolex is 
still shocking. I'm just happy to be here. And so I'd think of, if I wasn't me in the watch world, 
but I had made a few thousand bucks and I wanted to buy one of these things, how 
disappointed you would be, how angry you would be that you just worked your off for the 
last 40 years to get to a point where you can afford this thing and you're told "No"? I think 
that is a major problem. And I think that is going to continue to be a problem for a long time 
unless somebody changes.

Patrick
It's a really interesting balance of wanting it to be something aspirational, but once you achieve 
a certain bar, to be able to do it. It's a fine line that you have to walk as a luxury brand. Really, 
really interesting.

Ben
Look, it's integrity and its honesty. If somebody came to me and they knocked in mind door 
and said, "Hey, we want to buy your house." I'd probably say, "Well, I really appreciate that, 
but we're not looking to sell it. But in five years when my daughter's grown and we need a 
bigger house, I'll give you a call." I would call that person. And I think that person would 
respect me for saying, "Not right now, but I'll give you a shout when we're ready." What 
goes on now is not at all that. It's basically they say, "Hey, sir, please give me your name and 
we'll reach out if and when we have a product available," which doesn't mean a thing. It 
doesn't mean a thing. If you're a celebrity, if you're an entrepreneur, if you're somebody that 
has a million Instagram followers, they're going to call you soon, and if you're not, you're not 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 18 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
los us, LLC.



going to get a call at all. And I think that is when things get really dicey, when people that 
don't have purchase history is kind of the new street credit in the watch world. Here's 
another kind of interesting situation where a lot of brands are closing down authorized 
dealers. So they're closing stores. So let's say you, Patrick, were the number one Audemars 
Piguet client at some dealer in Ohio or something.

And you had bought a million dollars worth of APs from this authorized dealer in Ohio for 
over the past 10 years. And then that dealer got closed. And then you walked into the AP 
boutique on Seventh Street and said, "Hey, my name is Patrick. Look, I've spent a million 
bucks with this dealer that no longer exists. Can I have the new ceramic Tourbillon," or 
whatever. "We're so pleased for you to come in, blah, blah. We'd love to chat. But you don't 
have a purchase history here so we're going to have to put you to the bottom of the list." 
How would you feel about that? Imagine you've been buying that product in the correct me 
from an authorized dealer for a decade and you just got told you had to start all over again. 
And that is what's happening in the watch world right now. And I'm not singling out AP or 
anybody, but it's the arrogance of some of these brands that are very hot to think that they 
can continue to treat people that way even though everything is cyclical. And I've seen all 
these brands trade below retail, just like we're seeing them trade above retail right now.

Patrick
I'll certainly remember this conversation for this idea of companies that, as you get to know 
them, you like them more, which is probably quite a rare feature of any company. Typically, the 
thing you see on the front of it is the best version of the thing almost by definition. They're 
going to surface the most attractive, interesting stories, elements, whatever, but this idea that 
I'll think of those five floors below ground is a great lesson. Ben, this has been so much fun. 
What an interesting brand. I can't think of anything like it that's a nonprofit, that's had this 
endurance, that has this global recognition and style. Thank you so much for taking the time 
today to break it down with us.

Ben
It's my pleasure. It's been a lot of fun.

Introduction
Patrick
Today, we're breaking down one of the strongest brands in the world, Rolex. Founded in the UK 
in 1905 under the name Wilsdorf and Davis, Rolex has become the leading name in luxury 
watches. But while the company's products are iconic, the business itself is highly secretive. 
Owned by a foundation and run as a nonprofit entity, little is known about Rolex. To unlock the 
secrets, we're delighted to be joined by Ben Clymer, the founder of Hodinkee and an expert on 
all things luxury watches. Ben has had rare access to Rolex and the people behind the 
manufacturer, making him the perfect person to dissect the business with us. Please enjoy this 
excellent breakdown of Rolex.

What Makes a Rolex Special
Patrick
So Ben, I was trying to think of an appropriate first question to break down Rolex. I think it has to 
be, what is your favorite Rolex watch ever?

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 19 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossu
, LLC.



Ben
Oh man, that's a really complex question for a gentleman such as myself. The Daytona is 
probably my favorite Rolex as an object. There are Rolexes that mean a lot to me from a 
sentimental point of view, being my grandfather's, my father's, et cetera. But the Daytona as 
a thing has always been the peak of my fascination from the early 6239s, which is the first 
generation Daytona back before it even said Daytona on the dial. I wrote a story probably 10 
years ago plus at this point on Hodinkee about those. There was some curiosity within Rolex 
about what they should call it. And this was before they sponsored Daytona. In the original 
name of the Cosmograph, the chronograph, for racing was Le Mans. It's called Rolex for a 
variety of reasons, but one of which is Rolex is Rolex in any language. And Le Mans, with 
that silent S, the Rolex marketing department as small as it was in 1963 said, "You know 
what? That could turn off the American market." And if you've ever tried to pronounce 
Audemars Piguet as Audemars Piaget, which is about 50% of humanity, you realize how 
uncomfortable that can be. So they quickly went to the Daytona. So the Daytona as an 
object is probably my favorite. I will say that the watch that I'm actually wearing right now, 
which was actually the first modern Rolex I've ever bought, which is the Pepsi GMT in white 
gold, I actually just realized I bought two months after we published the Inside the Rolex 
story that I wrote in 2015, is probably the one that means the most to me because I've just 
had it the longest and it was to celebrate something personal at the time.

Patrick
So say a bit more about the Daytona. What is it about it as a physical object that you think 
makes it special?

Ben
First of all, I'm a very serious car guy, or I shouldn't say I'm a serious car guy, but I love cars a 
lot. And the Daytona, not just with Rolex, but with all watches, that is about cosplay. And 
the idea of you can be whoever you want to be. I'm this quiet dork from upstate New York. 
In my mind, I'm Paul Newman and I'm driving a vintage Ferrari or vintage Porsche at Le Mans 
or something super badass. And the Daytona is the quickest way in my mind to getting 
there. And then as somebody who is obsessive about things, as you can imagine, being that 
I started a blog about watches and now here we are, the Daytona has the most interesting 
history in the sense that it is, and it was, not produced, the movement was not produced, by 
Rolex until relatively recently, in the 2000s. Whereas, everything else, almost from day one, 
was produced by Rolex. So the Dayjust, the Day-Date, the Submariner, GMP, those were all 
Rolex movements. Daytona was not, which I think is just fascinating. And it gives you 
something to do. So in younger years when I was taking the subway, I would time how long 
my subway ride was or how long it took to cook the chicken in the oven, et cetera. But 
ultimately, the idea of a professional watch, which is Rolex sports watches, with a dial that 
didn't have to be black, all the other ones are black, GMP is a black dial, Submariner's a black 
dial, aesthetically was different. It was also smaller than most of the sports watches with the 
exception of the Explorer, which is the 36 millimeter watch. And it just had a lot of story that 
went with it, one of which, of course being the fact that Paul Newman himself wore one and 
that's of course the most expensive wrist watch ever sold not for charity.

There's just so much about the Daytona, but on a personal level, it came down to the 
aesthetics, the connection to motor sport, and then just simply the story behind it of that it 
was really not a success at all. And chronographs, whether it was Rolex, Heuer or Patek, 
anybody, these were really engineering focused or motor sport focused watches. They were 
not for consumers. They were not for guys like you and me, unless we were driving at tracks 
on the weekend. And similarly, with the Submariner, which I have right here, the idea of a 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 20 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col
sus, LLC.



desk diver, which is somebody that sits at a desk but pretends to dive, is really a very, very 
modern, very recent introduction. And back then, you bought a Submariner if you were 
actually diving. It wasn't because I'm going to my pool in upstate New York on the 
weekends. You were really diving. Otherwise, you were buying a small dress watch. And 
whether it's Rolex or Patek or any other, Vacheron, AP, Omega, the most expensive 
watches, historically speaking, in the mid-century of last century, were not sports watches 
or not even complicated watches. They were ultra slim watches. So if you look at Patek or 
AP or Vacheron being the three big boys at high end, the most expensive watches were not 
the perpetual calendars of chronographs, they were the ultra slim watches. And that 
represented the highest end version of watchmaking at the time. We're starting to see that 
a little bit now. Actually, Richard Mille just this past week introduced the thinnest 
mechanical watch ever made and it's $2 million. And Bulgari released one earlier this year 
that was, up until last week, the thinnest watch ever made and that was about $500,000, 
where the standard Bulgari would be, say, 15. So different times, for sure.

Patrick
You said something interesting, which is one of the jobs to be done for buying a Rolex is this 
cosplay idea of transporting you to a more interesting or fanciful lifestyle. Maybe you could 
describe, before we get to Rolex specifically, the brand, all the jobs that you think high end 
watches do for people. I don't want to take for granted that one of them is tell the time, but you 
can buy a Casio for 10 bucks that can tell the time.

Ben
Or your iPhone.

Patrick
Or anything. There's lots of ways to know what time it is. So describe to me through history, and 
especially today, all the main reasons you think people buy high end watches.

Ben
Historically speaking, digital time telling didn't exist before 1969. Full stop. When they were 
going to the moon, it wasn't like they could buy a Casio or use an iPhone. They needed a 
mechanical watch to strap on the outside of their flight suit. When you were racing Le Mans 
or the Mille Miglia in the 1950s, again, there was no such thing as digital time keeping so you 
wore a watch to do that. The functionality of it is obvious but I think it's worth repeating 
here because a lot of people don't remember that 100 years ago, 50 years ago, 60 years 
ago, there was no option. You were wearing a watch, and it was a mechanical watch, to do 
everything in your life. And so the idea of me looking at my Rolex now and then comparing it 
to my MacBook here, there was no option to do that. Guys set this watch once with 
probably an hourly bell on the TV or the radio and that was it. And then you would just 
assume that this would be accurate for basically in perpetuity. And then beyond that, going 
back to the earliest, earliest watches, the Marie Antoinette days, and she was one of the 
first supporters of what we call haute horology, I'll say it with an American accent, which is 
high end, really beyond basic time telling devices. And what I mean by that is you can buy a 
mechanical watch, and Hodinkee sells mechanical watch for about $150. So that's probably 
a Timex, or it might be a Swatch Sistem51, which are not battery powered. These are 
mechanical watches. Those are machine assembled. They're basically disposable. You throw 
them out when they're broken. You don't fix them. There's no what we call finishing or 
finissage, which is effectively aesthetic flourishes that differentiate those type of watches 
from, say, Rolex or Omega, which I would classify as mass market luxury, but the most long 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 21 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssus, LLC.



lasting of anything out there, and then what we call haute horology, which is slightly more 
artistic. You get complications, you get finishing of movements. I don't have any here with 
me. But something like a Patek, an AP, a Vacheron, an A. Lange & Söhne, et cetera, I would 
classify those as a category, frankly, significantly higher in terms of finishing and 
significantly higher in terms of human touch than Rolex or Omega.

On a Rolex, it's a closed case back. There are no Rolexes with open case backs but there are 
some Omegas. So Rolex is the number one brand in the world. Omega is the number two 
brand in the world, historically speaking, by sales. Omegas will have some open case backs, 
on the new Speedmaster, for example, which went to the moon. You can see the 
movement. So a lot of nerds, and now more of the nerds, want to see what's actually inside 
this watch. And it's simply because you're paying six or seven grand for this thing, you want 
to know what you're getting, you want to see that human touch to it. And that is why a lot 
of people are interested in high end watch making today. More recently, and this is very 
recent, really over the past two or three years, you get people that are buying on spec, on 
speculation, on the idea that these are safe investments, which they remain to this day. And 
that is really a new thing for me. So Hodinkee, our business, is 15 years old or approaching 
15 years old, and really, nobody thought of watches as investment vehicles in 2008, 2009. I 
shouldn't say very few. Some people at the very high end. And now, it's kind of common 
practice. And I do interviews with the Bloombergs of the world and the Wall Street Journals 
of the world almost weekly at this point talking about the ROI of not just Rolex, but AP and 
Omega and TAG Heuer, et cetera. There are several reasons why somebody might buy a 
watch. And frankly, that's why it was always so compelling to me as an ex finance guy, and 
why I wanted to get in this space, was it could be interesting, we'll say, to somebody that 
works in finance from an ROI perspective. It could be interesting to somebody in design 
from an aesthetic perspective. An engineer from a manufacturing perspective. For 
somebody like me, who's an externalist, from a storytelling perspective. There's so many 
reasons why you could be interested in it, but the reasons why that people continue to buy 
is that they are so forever lasting.

This watch I've had for seven years, I've never had it serviced. And frankly, I probably won't 
need to service it for another seven years. And when my daughter, who was just born six 
months ago, is my age, 40 years from now, she'll be able to wear this watch that I'm 
showing to you on this Zoom call right now. There's something so wonderful about the 
longevity of these things in a way nothing can replicate. And even a great car, we'll say a 
Mercedes or a Porsche or something like that, you really need to maintain those. And 
frankly, the internal combustion engine 50 years from now will probably not even be 
serviceable. Jewelry is a different thing because there's craftsmanship there. And I have a 
lot of respect for great artisans of jewelry. But there's no engineering. There's no motion 
there. And I think what's so remarkable about Rolex as the archetype, but all mechanical 
watches, is that I could put this on my wrist and if I decided to sell all my other watches, I 
could wear this every day while I sleep, while I shower, while I work out and it would 
continue to tell time for me and it would rely on me as much as I rely on it. I think there's 
something beautiful in that, that kind of symbiotic relationship between the device and the 
man. And it's just a wonderful kind of totem to a different way of living.

Building Luxury Brands
Patrick
It's such a fascinating set of different things and considerations. I'm also curious how you think 
about the luxury strategy itself from a marketing standpoint behind watches. I remember 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 22 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colos us, LLC.



reading this book called The Luxury Strategy, which I recommend to anyone interested in this 
topic. And one of the ideas that stands out from that book is that when marketing a luxury 
product, you want the ratio of the number of people aware of something to those that actually 
have it to be as wide as possible. Because one of the jobs you're doing when you buy a really 
fancy watch is you want other people to know that it's a marker of success, sort of like a 
signaling function to watches. How do you think that piece of this has evolved over time?

Ben
That has become ever present and I think more so now than ever before. Just speaking of 
my own experience 15 years ago when I started Hodinkee, nobody knew what a vintage 
Rolex was. If I may say, we were the first people to give any attention at scale to vintage 
Rolex and collectible Rolexes. Basically, if you went to an auction Christie's, Sotheby's 
auction in New York, there would be about seven dealers in there and they would just be 
buying and selling amongst themselves. Now you go and it's a black tie affair with 
champagne and several well known personalities from entertainment and sports are sitting 
in the audience. It's a totally different thing. Again, we can talk about the origins of Rolex 
and how they were at the forefront of this. They were effectively the first people to have 
real marketing dollars put behind a watch. There were people that ran ads here and there, 
Longines was a big one, with Charles Lindbergh. But Rolex did it in a concerted way and 
they have continued to do that in a way that is simply just unmatched by others.

And I think what's so remarkable, Rolex was always the number one brand in the United 
States, historically speaking, from the 1950s to today. But if you look back, say, I don't know, 
15, 16 years, so pre 2008. So the financial crisis of 2008, which is actually how I started 
Hodinkee, when this all kind came to be, was a real turning point for Rolex in the US because 
when all the other brands, their competitors being Omega, which is a huge, huge brand, TAG 
Heuer, which is a good size brand, the folks that you would think, they were there, they 
were present in the conversation with Rolex. They pulled back on marketing when people 
stopped buying after 2008, when Lehman collapsed. Rolex did not. Rolex put the pedal 
down. And it was really 2008, 2009, 2010, which really elevated Rolex in the United States 
to a level that it is today. If you speak to them directly, they'll credit with that period as kind 
of the turning point for them in the US.

Patrick
Maybe before we go into the history, which is so interesting and really important, we could just 
do a level set for the audience on Rolex the business and just some basics like how many 
watches do they produce a year, the revenue that they produce a year, maybe say a little bit 
about their very unique business structure, which is certainly shocking to me and I think will 
shock some people too that aren't familiar with it. Just level set us on the size and type of the 
Rolex as a business.

Ben
And I want to be completely clear, and I'm sure Rolex will listen to this, so I want to be clear 
for them and for the audiences that they don't communicate anything so this is all 
speculative. The information that I'll provide and that I'm sure you read is completely 
speculative. We have a good idea of what they might produce and what the revenue might 
be. The assumption is is that Rolex is making just north of around a million watches per year 
with an average wholesale price of around $7,000. So you can do the math there to kind of 
give you an idea of size and revenue. And a million watches per year is a lot, but it's not the 
biggest by quantity. Apple, of course, would be bigger than that. Arguably, if you included 
Apple, they would be an even bigger watch brand than Rolex, but different thing obviously. 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 23 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lossus, LLC.



But if you were to combine, for example, the entire Swatch group, which ranges from 
Swatch to Breguet, including Omega, it would be a larger business than Rolex, in theory. But 
again, Swatch is a publicly traded company, you can see exactly what their revenue is, 
whereas Rolex is, as I think you've alluded to, Rolex is quite the opposite. Rolex is in fact run 
by something called the Hans Wilsdorf Foundation, which was founded in 1945 when the 
founder, Hans Wilsdorf, set it up to basically be effectively, a nonprofit run by a group of 
families that are still highly involved with the business today that have, I would say, 
effectively zero public interaction. I'm pretty close with Rolex and I'm pretty close with the 
watch industry you could say and I have met, I think, one board member, one time. That was 
not by design. I think I met him at a bar and I was like, "Oh, you're so and so," and he said, 
"Yes." These people are in fact, the most powerful people in watches and nobody even 
knows their name. Nobody even knows what they look like. I happen to because this is my 
job, but most people have no clue who's really pulling the strings at Rolex. There's a 
wonderful CEO named Jean-Frederic Dufour, who used to be the president of Zenith, which 
is an LVMH brand and he is absolutely the base and brain behind much of Rolex, but there is 
a board there and like any board, they have a different kind of influence over the brand.

Rolex is effectively a nonprofit, some say one of the largest nonprofits in the world, which I 
would believe. There are dozens and dozens of rumors that you may have heard, such as 
they've got the largest private art collection next to the Vatican, or they own more real 
estate. They make more money in real estate than they do in watches. Any of those things 
could be true. What I can say with the utmost certainty is that they will never reveal any of 
that to be true, even if it is. They're not the type of brand, type of company that will ever 
stand on the rooftop and shout about anything. I mentioned this in the story that I wrote in 
2015, whereas most brands, they're trying to create stories where there aren't any, a lot of 
brands will say a watch is in-house and you manufacture it in-house when it's not. Rolex 
doesn't do any of that. In fact, what's so remarkable and I found this out on my own, doing 
my own research for that story in 2015, they will make several updates to products at some 
significant cost to themselves and not change the retail price and not even tell anybody 
about it and the only reason that I found out was when doing research for that story, I spoke 
to an independent watchmaker who is in New York City and is one of the best watchmakers 
in the country, if not the world, and he said, he works on Rolex, as well as other brands. 
These are the changes that they made to their movements without anybody knowing. By 
the way, these other brands that are communicating about LIGA, which is a manufacturing 
technique that allows you to have frictionless gears, a brand sent out a press release about 
that. Then, he came to find out that Rolex had been doing that for five years. It was in half 
their watches already. That's what's so wonderful about Rolex is they just are so remarkably 
Swiss. They are so conservative and thoughtful in the way that they communicate. When I 
wrote that story in 2015, I was one of the first journalists who ever be invited inside Rolex's 
manufacturing headquarters in Bienne, Switzerland, which is what movements are made. 
They just are not out there to talk about themselves really ever. It's incredibly charming. The 
luxury world is so much about Instagram and influencers and people touting how 
prestigious any brand might be and Rolex is just quietly the most prestigious.

Patrick
It is so ridiculously singular. I cannot think of another example of a company that I want to come 
to vertical integration and quality and some of these key brand elements and real elements of a 
Rolex in the absence of a profit motive over such a long period of time. There just aren't other 
stories like this, where there's such dominance.

Ben

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 24 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col
sus, LLC.



The only other two that come to my mind are two brands that I know of. One of which 
would be Patek Philippe, which is another family. It's owned by the Sterns completely. 
There's not any outside capital. Again, family run, Geneva, very, very close to the Rolex 
group, obviously, physically and emotionally, I should say. They continue to just do things in 
a way that is different than everybody else. Then, the other one would be Hermès, of 
course. They have some outside capital, but effectively controlled by one family, has been 
for 100 years. Hermès is part of the fashion life cycle. They are at fashion shows and they 
get into, you can buy an Hermès watch box or ash tray or lounge share or suitcase. They're a 
little bit broader, but their commitment to quality and the way that they've integrated is 
exceptional, I can say, but Patek and Rolex, I would say are unique in that way.

The History and Evolution of Rolex
Patrick
Maybe you can give us the, I don't really care how long it is, as long as you want to make it 
because it's so damn interesting, the history of Rolex, the brand and the company, its founding 
and its key timeline milestones.

Ben
Rolex is younger than most other brands. It's younger than Omega. It's younger than 
Vacheron by 150 years. It's younger than Patek. In the Swiss watch world, I wouldn't call it a 
baby by any means, but not one of these grandfathers. I mean, Vacheron was founded in 
1755. That's older than the United States of America. Rolex was founded by a guy named 
Hans Wilsdorf, who's Austrian, but he was a total anglophile. He really just was obsessed 
with the United Kingdom in the early part of the 1900s. He goes into the UK and starts a 
company called Wilsdorf & Davis in 1905. Back then, you have to remember that, forget 
digital watch making. Wrist watches were not a thing. The wrist watch was really a product 
of World War I, which was guys and trenches, trench watches, were strapping pocket 
watches to the wrist so that they didn't have to pull out of their pocket. It was a little bit 
more complex, but that's it at a high level. Wilsdorf, in 1905, decides to focus on wrist 
watches, which is crazy. I mean, it was a little bit, frankly like Elon Musk focusing on EVs 10, 
15 years ago. People just weren't ready for it. He committed to doing the wrist watch in the 
early part of the 1900s, 1905, 1908 and in 1908, he creates a company called Rolex. Again, 
there's lots of hearsay on why it's Rolex. I think at the very least it's safe to say that he chose 
that word because it's the same pronunciation in all languages. Some people say it's the 
sound it makes. There's no confirmation on that, but effectively what he does is he's just the 
distributor. He's not making anything from 1905 to about 1908.

In '08, he buys a movement, which is what powers watch from a company called Aegler, A-
E-G-L-E-R, which we'll get back to later. They're still around today, buys a movement, puts it 
in a case made by himself and sends it off to, it's called an observatory, but effectively what 
it is, it's a testing facility, effectively a nonprofit that says, these watches or time telling 
devices, clock, Marine chronometer or whatever, are accurate within, we'll say X and Y, 
effectively saying, these are the most precise time telling devices on earth, typically done 
for Marine chronometers and if you know anything about this history of longitude, like that 
is effectively how longitude was discovered. This is just paramount to basically all 
exploration of the time period. Up until that point, no wrist watches had ever even been 
submitted to this thing called the QA, which is a British testing facility at that point. In 1908, 
he does that with an Aegler powered watch. It's a 44 day test and it is given the QA 
certificate. Again, nobody had ever done it. Some years later, about 10 years later, he 
submitted 136 movements back to the QA. I think 24 of them were cased in 34 millimeter 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 25 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
oss

, LLC.



gold cases and then another 112 were in what we call boy size, which is really very small. I 
mean, at this point, it would look like a nickel, but these are effectively the formula one cars 
of watch movements. There were other watch movements at the time that to you and me 
and most people, would look exactly the same, but these were high performance calibers 
and they did it with a special escapement. Escapement is basically how time telling was 
regulated. These were effectively the formula one cars of watchmaking and they were done 
in a way that was very, even back then, very Rolex. There was really no indication that these 
were anything special on a dial, besides it would say QA on them. They're around. You can 
buy them today for really less than you might think.

Once he had been given the QA certificates for the first wrist watch ever, he decided really 
to focus on three tenants of watchmaking, which really were not at all prevalent in that day 
at all, because it was really about utility. The watch can tell you the time pretty well or it was 
about luxury. At that point, we're talking the Cartiers, Patek Philippes, complications, really. 
History tenants of manufacturing, which remain true to this day, would be precision, 
accuracy, waterproofness, which didn't really exist at the time, and then self winding. What I 
mean by that is ability to not have to wind the watch manually. Precision was done. We've 
covered that. These watches were based on QA. They came up with a new escapement to 
make them more precise. Waterproofness, I think, goes back to the question you asked 
about five minutes ago, which is, how did you get something that more people know about 
that basically can afford or confine? He created something called the oyster case and now 
almost all Rolexes with the exception of the Cellini line, use an oyster case. That basically 
just means a waterproof case. Nobody was doing it at the time. Omega had something that 
was pretty close and actually predates the oyster case, but never really took off in the same 
way. Instead of using seals, it was almost like a locking system. It didn't really take off, but 
effectively there was this woman named Mercedes Gleitz, who was a typist, of all things, 
basically a secretary in the UK and she had swum the English channel successfully, the first 
woman to swim the English channel successfully.

Hans Wilsdorf, the founder said, "Hey, wouldn't it be cool if this woman, A, she's a woman, B, 
she's doing this amazing feat that no one had ever done before. Wouldn't it be cool if she 
wore the watch around her neck?" She didn't wear it on her wrist to be clear. She put her 
around her neck and she attempted to swim the English channel. She actually didn't 
successfully do it. She failed, but nobody really cared because she had already done it 
before. He took out an ad celebrating the fact that this watch was around this woman's 
neck for 10 hours in the English channel and the time keeping was flawless. That solidified 
Rolex as A, a household name because the oyster case had been validated in the English 
channel with this early brand ambassador, I guess you would call her. That was a huge deal 
and I think one of the earliest examples of real marketing by any luxury brand or any brand 
really at all, and then the final tenant would be self winding, which is, I would equate it to the 
automatic transmission. When the automatic transmission came around, all of a sudden, 
driving a car became a hell of a lot easier. It just became wider accepted, et cetera. Prior to, 
I guess it was around 19, I'm going to say, 30 something that Rolex patented the first self 
winding movement. To be clear, there was somebody called John Harwood that actually had 
a different self winding movement first. I think that was in the twenties and his idea was to 
make a hammer. Some of them would bounce back and forth like this to continue to power 
the watch. Rolex said, let's go a different array. Let's create a rotor, so a weight that would 
oscillate around inner circle to power the watch.

That worked and Rolex had, actually I remember the date. It was 1933 because it had a 20 
year patent on it and Patek Philippe, which was another stall watch of traditional 
watchmaking, saw this and said, "Oh shit, we need to do that too," but they couldn't actually 
release anything until 20 years later because of the patent. The Patek 2526, which is their 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 26 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lo

sus, LLC.



first self winding watch that came out in 1953. That's a different thing all together, but 
effectively, Hans Wilsdorf said, "I want the watches to be precise," check with the QA. "I 
want them to be waterproof," check with the oyster case, "And I want them to be self 
winding," check with the perpetual. If you see oyster perpetual on any Rolex, which you'd 
see in all Rolexes now, oysters are waterproof. Perpetual is the self winding. From there, 
Rolex went out to make watches and they were doing things very much in a similar style to 
everyone else at that time until the early fifties. In the post-war era, post World War II era, 
they created their first sports watch. By sports watch, the technical term is professional 
watch by Rolex nomenclature. It's the Submariner, which is the diver's watch, which is 1953. 
It's the GMT, which is the pilot's watch, which is 1955. Explorer I, which is an Explorer's 
watch or an all day everyday watch, which is 53 as well. Then, you had the Daytona in 1963. 
Later, you had the Sea-Dweller in 67, which is a beef up version of the Sub. Then, the 
Explorer II in, I guess, 1970 or so. Those are the watches that I think most people now think 
of when they think of watch. You see rotating bezel in most cases. You see a black dial in 
most cases. You see an oyster bracelet, which is a very wonderfully produced bracelet with 
an oyster lock bracelet. That is really when things change.

To be clear, Rolex was not alone. There were other brands doing it. Some would say earlier, 
some would say around the same time, but the Blancpain Fifty Fathoms is credited to 1953. 
The Omega Seamaster 300 and 120 are around the same time as well. They were not alone 
and you have to remember that even Rolex in the watch industry in that period, it was really 
a smattering of different suppliers. If you look at, for example, and I wrote about this several 
times over the past few years, if you look at, say the Rolex Daytona from 1963 and the Heuer 
Carrera from 1963, it uses the exact same movement and I'm saying the exact same 
movement, and that's a Valjoux 72. Same case maker, same dial maker, same hand maker. 
What is the actual difference? The assembly was done by Rolex and the assembly was done 
by Heuer, but the product itself was really very similar. If you look at early Seamasters and 
early Submariners, a lot of similarity there. The difference was of course the oyster case, but 
that was how watch making was done. If you look at say, example of Patek Philippe 2499, 
that's based on a Valjoux movement. You don't think of that. You think of Patek as Patek. 
This is the holy grail, but up until really, I mean the 2000s, they were using what you call an 
Ebauche movement, which is just really movement blank and then, it would be finished by 
Patek or finished by AP or Vacheron or whoever. Rolexes were really, I would say, finished to 
a higher quality than most, but I mean, any good Blancpain or any good Omega would do 
much of what Rolex was doing. It was really not until much, much later in the seventies first 
when we had the Quartz crisis, which is effectively the creation of Quartz, which is analog 
time, but with a battery, which is dramatically more precise, I mean, dramatically more 
precise than mechanical watch making.

What is interesting to think about, and I give full credit to my old colleague, Joe Thompson, 
who's the legend in the watch writing world, is the Japanese came in with Quartz, Seiko 
created it, effectively, came in and there was a war between Swiss mechanical watch 
making and Quartz analog timekeeping. To be clear, the Swiss lost. The Swiss lost by a 
country mile. All of a sudden, those guys that were buying a Rolex or Omega or a Heuer, 
because they were the most precise thing in the world just said, "You know what" why 
would I do that? I can buy a Quartz watch that is 10 times more accurate," 10 times, and by 
the way, you don't need to have good service. You just swap out the new battery or 
whatever all the time and that decimated the Swiss watch industry to a point where very, 
very few brands were producing things at a profit of any kind. Jack Heuer, whose family 
owned TAG Heuer before it was TAG. It was just Heuer at the time. In his biography, I mean, 
he talks almost going into bankruptcy. If you talk to Gerry Stern, whose father Philippe Stern 
and his grandfather have owned Patek for generations. In the late seventies, they had to 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 27 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lossus, LLC.



borrow with their bank.

Patrick
It's existential.

Ben
Yeah, this was real. It wasn't just the smaller brands. Patek had issues. Heuer had issues. 
Rolex was really smart in that, through that period of real turmoil when, I would say, their 
chief competitor Omega decided to make some Quartz watches, decided to make some 
funky looking things, Rolex stayed the course, and yes, they did make Quartz watches. The 
Beta 21, which was a Swiss conglomerates answer to Quartz, is the most expensive Quartz 
watch ever made. I mean like thousands and thousands of dollars, they said, "We're going to 
focus on what we do best," and the focus went away from precision and accuracy and time 
telling to luxury. That is when you start seeing the gold Rolex on, I hate to say it, but the 
used car salesman and the gold Rolex became the thing, seventies and eighties, opulence, 
you understand what the eighties were, of course. It just changed what Rolex was, but by 
the way, it worked and it allowed them to continue to be relevant when everybody else 
being Omega, Patek to a degree, Vacheron, these brands really struggled. That is why so 
many of them ended up in conglomerates. In the eighties and nineties, when watches were, 
mechanical watches, were really not doing so hot, a lot of folks came in and bundled them 
all up. Richemont owns a bunch of the great ones, including Vacheron. Swatch owns 
everything from Swatch to Blancpain, Breguet, Omega. It was a time of great challenge for 
sure. Rolex, they struggled as well, never to the degree that the others did, but it was not 
great for them. Then, the nineties started to come around and Rolex had a CEO by the name 
of Patrick Heiniger. His father was actually also CEO too, to give you an idea of how things 
work at Rolex. And he said, "I want to take Rolex in-house," and he was really the first to do, 
frankly well before Patek or well before anybody else. Rolex was using 27 different suppliers 
to make, say, Submariner.

After he was done with it, they're using four and now, those four are completely owned by 
Rolex. There are four different production facilities, two in Geneva, one in, what I would call, 
Proper Geneva one and Plan-les-Ouates, which is a little bit outside and then there's one in 
Chêne-Bourg, which does dials and there's one in Bienne, which makes the movements. 
What's so amazing is, Rolex, to me, the secret sauce is equal parts case, equal parts 
movement. The case is, you can reverse engineer if you're a competitor and say, "Okay, 
what's an oyster case? It's got this. It's got that. It's polished there. Seals are done by X, Y, 
and Z." Movements are a different thing entirely. And what's amazing is Rolex Geneva, 
which is basically dials, cases, bracelets, all that stuff, and Rolex BN, which is up in the 
mountains in Vallée de Joux, had a handshake deal for 70 years. And I mean, an actual 
handshake deal that the calibers made by what was then called Aegler, who made the first 
movement for Hans Wilsdorf, that company was making movements solely for Rolex 
Geneva based on nothing but a handshake. And I mean that literally. There was nothing in 
writing up until 2004, which is just insane to think about. I mean, Rolex was certainly a 
multi-billion dollar a year business before then. And up until 2004, there was no contract in 
place to say that Aegler couldn't make movements for Omega or TAG Heuer or whoever. 
And so in 2004, Rolex said, "You know what? Enough's enough. Let's get married here," and 
they purchased the company. And so now Rolex BN is basically what Aegler was up in the 
mountains until 2004. And so Rolex now has four different production facilities. As I wrote 
that story, I was among the first to be invited inside the movement manufacturing, which is 
really the source of the IP. That is where the sausage is made, so to speak. Just remarkable. 
If you haven't read the story, it's on Hodinkee called Inside The Manufacturer: Visiting All 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 28 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lo

us, LLC.



Four Rolex Locations. It was remarkable. As I started out in that story, this was 10 years ago 
or seven years ago, I was a lover of watches.

I was a lover of Rolex and I had four Rolexes then than had anything else at that point. None 
of them were as old as I was. They were all considerably older than me. And it's funny, I 
reread the story to prepare for this interview. And now since then, I've bought more modern 
Rolexes than I have vintage. And the world is just a different place. But once you see 
everything that Rolex does to a watch, and what I mean by that is the fact that they have 
their own foundry, even the steel, not just the gold and precious metals, even the steel on 
Rolex is proprietary and it's made by Rolex. It's 904L. It's wild. They make their own gold. It's 
called Everose if it Rolex gold. It's just remarkable. And what I think is even more telling of 
what Rolex is about is that one of their facilities they actually have, and I mean this literally, 
more than two Nobel prize-winning scientists on staff working on watches. Think about 
what that must mean from a material science perspective. The innovation done by Rolex is 
just above and beyond anything I've seen. I've been to every watch maker in the world. I've 
been to several car manufacturers doing this. I've been all over. I've been inside Hermès. 
There's just nothing like this. They create machines to test their machines that make 
watches. They have their own oyster test, which of course provides artificial pressure on a 
watch to know that it's waterproof. They have a machine that can open and close a Rolex 
clasp a thousand times a minute, which is kind of amazing, because you actually have to 
open. It's wild. So, you open this. It's actually kind difficult to do. Imagine doing that a 
thousand times a minute. They invented a machine to do that. They have a machine in 
Chêne-Bourg, which is their dial and gem-setting location, to sort through all the stones 
that they're given. First of all, Rolex only works with IF, which is internally flawless stones, 
which is obviously the most expensive, highest end. To ensure that the stones that they're 
given, whether it's diamonds or rubies or anything are real, they created a machine to sort 
them at scale and ensure that all of them are real. And I said, "Well, are bad stones or fake 
stones are real problem for you?"

They said, "No, not really. But we just want to ensure that every watch we sell is what we 
want it to be." And I was like, "How often do you get a fake diamond or a fake anything?" 
And the answer was, "One out of 10 million." To be clear, this machine was created either by 
them or they paid somebody to make it for them. This is their machine. It's not like it exists 
outside Rolex. And this gives you an idea of what they're about and how they do things. And 
it is so wonderful and so different than traditional luxury, which frankly, I may say, even as a 
purveyor of luxury items, is full of shit half the time. I'm into sneakers, but not in the way that 
I'm into other things. Why would a pair of so special edition sneakers sell for $5,000? 
Sneakers are made in China by machines. They're hand- stitched here and there. It's just 
designed. It's artificial scarcity, et cetera. When you see what goes into a, really, any high-
end mechanical watch, but in particular Rolex, you really start to understand. The 
Submariner, we'll say, is 8,000 bucks. That might be a deal after you see what goes into this 
thing. And I mentioned in the story, several competing brand presidents had told me before 
I went on this trip that, "Oh, not a human hand touches a Rolex before it's made. It's all done 
by machine." Which is effectively the most insulting thing a Swiss person can say, meaning 
that it's void of character. It's void of humanity. It's like luxury should be about people. It 
should be about craftsmanship. And they're saying, "Rolex doesn't have any of that." And I 
was like, "Oh, okay. That's kind of a bummer." That may have informed why I didn't own any 
modern Rolex at the time. You walk into Rolex HQ in Geneva and you see hundreds of 
people finishing watches. And they're not finishing in the same way Patek or Lange would, 
by hand with little pieces of wood. They're finishing maybe six or seven Rolexes at a time on 
a polishing wheel, but they're still polishing really the way that it should be done.

They're assembling dials by hand. They're assembling the bracelet by hand. There's an 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 29 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Coloss
s, LLC.



incredible amount of hand work that goes into the most basic of Rolex, being like a 
Submariner or a Datejust. Beyond that, what's so fun about them is they know exactly how 
different they are than everyone else. They also know that everyone wants to be like them. 
So, at at least two of their four facilities you might drive by and say, "Oh, there's Rolex. It's 
five stories high. It's, I don't know, a few hundred thousand square feet." When you go 
inside, you realize that it's actually 10 or 11 stories high, but five or six of those stories are 
below ground. And I just remember thinking, "Why would they do that? What's the point of 
that?" And it was in fact to suggest to anybody that drives by that Rolex is smaller than they 
actually are. And I think if we had any idea of how big the foundation was, it would blow all 
of us away. I think it's enormous. I think they're probably producing more than a million a 
year, but that's the generally accepted number. It's who they are. And if they're going to do 
something, they want to do things at the highest level. I'm a golfer and have been lucky 
enough to meet some of their players. And Adam Scott became a good friend and I asked, 
"Why don't you sponsor X, Y, and Z?" or, "Why don't you go grassroots?" Whatever. And 
they said, "This is Rolex like my golf. If we're going to do golf, we only want to be involved 
with the majors. So, the US Open, the BJ Championship, the Masters, and of course the 
British Open. And that's it." If they're going to do tennis, it's going to be Wimbledon and the 
US Open. They don't even want to mess with some of the other majors in tennis. It's just 
remarkable how committed they are to working with the very best. It's wild. It really is.

Rolex's Marketing and Distribution Secrets
Patrick
It's an unbelievable story. And also it's amazing to me the commitment to quality over time. And 
I'm sure there's incredible pressure for all sorts of reasons, maybe the non for profit thing is 
actually a benefit here, but there's always pressure to skimp a little bit on quality, right? Like give 
up the absolute perfect standard, because it could mean a lot more sales or a lot more scale or 
whatever. And they just haven't done it. So, you could think about buying one and looking at it 
and having it be a reminder of this commitment, all the way down to the gold. The fact that they 
own all the way down to the bare metals in the ground is crazy. As you think about their genius 
on, I guess, quality and manufacturing, what is the equivalent on the marketing and distribution 
side? So, you mentioned the great example of the woman swimming across the channel as a 
marque event that made a big splash, and they're focused on the upper echelon of whatever 
they're doing. What else do you think Rolex can teach the world's companies about unbelievable 
marketing or distribution?

Ben
Referencing slightly what I was just mentioning, that commitment to only working with the 
absolute best and forgoing opportunity, foregoing working with the next generation of, we'll 
say golfers in this case, the guys that are coming up now, until they've been validated as the 
very best, then they're just not interested. And good work if you can get it. Not everyone 
has the benefit of being able to say, "I want to work with Tiger Woods, therefore Tiger 
Woods will work with me." But I think they are just so unrelenting to their pursuit of 
excellence in the literal sense, the very best in the world, no matter what it is. It's Yo-Yo Ma. 
It's not the person that has played Carnegie hall twice. It's Yo-Yo Ma. It's Roger Federer in 
the tennis world. What's so amazing is they care about the people as much as they do the 
results. And Roger, I think, is the ultimate archetype for the Rolex. They call them Rolex 
testimonies. They don't call them ambassadors. Roger is, I wouldn't be ashamed to say, I 
think Roger's a hero to many of us. And I'm not really even a tennis player, a tennis fan. Just 
the way he-

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 30 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ss

s, LLC.



Patrick
His character.

Ben
... floats above the air. Yeah. He floats above the air, no matter what room that he's in. He's 
just a gentleman and he married his high school sweetheart. He's just a wonder. And I've 
met him through Rolex and he is just a delightful person and completely authentic. They 
look at that. They want to be associated with people that are not only the best, but are 
genuinely good people as well. And again, good work if you can get it or it would be nice to 
only work with the best people that are also the best performers, but they really maintain 
with that. And their partnerships are different. I'm trying to think of an example. I'll say 
Leonardo DiCaprio. He's been an ambassador for TAG Heuer. He's been an ambassador, I 
think, for IWC. He is a hyper-famous, hyper-talented person. He doesn't care. That's just 
money for him, et cetera. The contracts he's had with, let's with, with TAG Heuer probably 
lasted five years. Rolex has worked with Jack Nicklaus since 1967. 1967. They work with him 
to this day. He's still very much alive and he's had a bunch of Rolexes. We did a video with 
him. But I mean, think about that deal. 1967 to 2022. That's just wild. Omega does that to a 
degree. They've had a partnership with Cindy Crawford since the early '90s, and now Kaia 
Gerber's with Omega. It's not an official ambassadorship. It's a much longer term thing, but 
Rolex really takes it to the next level. And they've been with Roger for his entire career.

They really are committed to long-term meaningful relationships, much more so than any 
other brand. It's not like with some of these luxury brands or car companies where, okay, 
"New CEO. I believe in tennis and equestrian." Then he gets let go and the new guy comes in 
and, "I believe in sailing and motor sports." It's not like that at all. There are core tenants of 
Rolex, motor sport is in fact one of them, then that's it. They're not playing in the NBA. 
They're not sponsoring baseball. They're not sponsoring the NFL. They're doing the things 
that they do, which is equestrian, sailing to a degree. It's motor sports, tennis, and golf. And 
it's just amazing that these strategies continue to deliver decade after decade. What was 
golf in 1967? I actually don't know the answer, but I can tell you it was probably not a big 
deal, especially back then. And the fact that they were committed back then and they're 
even more committed now is just remarkable.

Patrick
What have you learned about maybe the way that they make decisions, obviously being so long-
term oriented is one of those things, that again you think is most portable to other either luxury 
brands or just businesses in general, based on how singular they seem to be and how they make 
their choices?

Ben
It's kind of silly, but it's almost too simple, I should say. And I think it's ultimately this adage 
of, "Do the right thing." They're creating products that deliver in a way that is so far beyond, 
I think, what people understand that people would be shocked. The way that I used to 
process, I used to write for the site. I don't anymore. But as a journalist, I went to journalism 
school. I would say two types of companies, one of which is the more you learn about the 
company, the less you like them, the less you respect them. And frankly, that's a lot of luxury 
companies. You realize that, "Okay, this Swiss-made watch is actually made in China. This 
bag is actually not hand-sewn, it's sewn by machine." Little things like that. And then there 
are other companies where the more you learn about them, the more you like them. Rolex is 
the archetype of that. That article that I wrote in 2015, that was a foundational shift in my 
opinion of how watches should be made, mass luxury watches. And I think they continued 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 31 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Co oss
s, LLC.



to innovate in a way that we at Hodinkee continue to strive to be like. I mean, as an example, 
they have two in-house components that nobody knows about, or very few people know 
about. One of them is called Parachrom, which is a balance wheel, which is literally the thing 
that rotates inside the watch. There was basically, I wouldn't call it a monopoly, but pretty 
damn close to a monopoly on getting those things. And everybody from Patek to Rolex 
were using something called the Nivarox balance wheel. And Rolex said, "You know what? 
We're going to make our own at some astronomical cost, and it's going to be 10 times as 
accurate as the competitor." And they did that. And that's one of the few times they 
actually communicated on a technical innovation.

They also have their own shock absorbing system, I think it's called Paraflex, that again, 50% 
more absorbent than your traditional shock absorbent system. Would that change? Would 
that stop you or me or the guy on the street from buying a Rolex if they didn't? Not at all. 
Not at all. But they do it because they should. And they are at the core of it. What's so 
charming about them at the core of it is they are master marketers, master everything, 
master distributors, but they are watchmakers at the core of it. The Submariner, this GMP, 
this anything, I would put against any watch in the world in terms of production ability. The 
other thing I should say is that they know what they're good at and they know what they're 
not. And Rolex does not sell watches. Rolex makes watches. They own exactly, and it may 
have even closed, I should check, I'll back-check this afterwards, Rolex owns one retail store. 
One. And Patek follows a similar model. They have, I think, four. They have London, Paris, 
Geneva, and I think Hong Kong. Rolex has one, and I actually think it may have closed, and 
it's in Switzerland. And that's simply because they had a, it was basically a family friend type 
situation that owned it, then they ended up acquiring it. So, if you go to the Rolex boutique 
in Manhattan, for example, which is in the Rolex building, that's not owned by Rolex. That's 
owned by Wempe, which is a great authorized dealer. It's actually right up the road. It's a 
German-based company. If you go to the Rolex boutique in Singapore, it's either The Hour 
Glass or another authorized dealer. So, they're not selling watches. They're selling them at 
wholesale to retailers who then make between, we'll say, 20 and 50% on every product they 
sell. And imagine your Rolex, right?

You're thinking that you've got more demand than you could possibly ever supply. And 
you're thinking, "Man, I'm giving away 20 to 50% of everything I sell. Why don't we just do 
that?" And they don't change. Because they know that first of all, everything's cyclical. The 
watch market is going through a boom unlike I've ever seen in 14 years of doing this, unlike 
the market's ever seen at all. That may or may not last. We've reached a shift where things 
will never go back to the way they were before, but things are softening up a little bit. And 
they realize, "Hey, we make watches. We don't sell them." And to have the self-control and 
the wherewithal to basically walk away from 20 to 50% of retail sales at that scale globally 
when the demand is just capacious is just so admirable. And because they know that in 100 
years, maybe things will change or maybe in 10 years, things will change. It wasn't really 
Rolex, but in 2014 or '15, around the same time that I went to go see them in Geneva, 
something called the Apple Watch came out. And Rolex is Rolex. They're going to be fine. 
But a lot of the other brands were like, "Man, is this going to eat our lunch?" And to be clear, 
it did. If you want to say apple's to apples, the Apple Watch is a bigger watch than Rolex by 
quantity and by revenue. But Rolex is obviously fine. It has changed, and this is not an Apple 
Watch segment but I'll just mention it briefly, it has changed how people buy luxury 
watches. The luxury watch pre-Apple Watch I would consider $1,000 and above. Maybe 
even $500 and above. It has decimated that market. So, the market between 500 and 
sub-5,000 has just been destroyed. The brands like Shinola and Fossil. Fossil was a multi, 
multi-billion dollar company. I mean, just enormous. Their share-

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 32 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossu
, LLC.



Patrick
You don't hear that name anymore. Yeah.

Ben
Exactly. Their share price in 2013, '14 pre-Apple Watch was $80 a share. But last time I 
checked, it was eight. Probably even lower than that now. They've lost 90% of their market 
cap. Apple Watch has, in some ways, helped the Rolexes and the Omega's of the world 
because Rolex and Omega and TAG Heuer, they are luxury to most people. They're clearly 
expensive. They start around 5,000 bucks instead of around one, like some of the other 
folks do. That's the baseline now. Now, you want a Rolex, Omega, TAG Heuer or above or 
nothing. You don't want the Shinola anymore. You don't want the Fossil anymore. And I think 
Apple Watch was a big, big player in that.

Patrick
Maybe say a bit, obviously we don't have the data on Rolex specifically, but just from what you 
know about the watch industry, about the income statement of a watch brand. Are they very 
high gross margin, like a lot of luxury products?

Ben
They are.

Patrick
How are they typically distributed? Anything interesting there that you think maps back onto 
Rolex. This is Business Breakdown. It's not just product breakdowns, although here the product 
is way more interesting. Anything worth mentioning there, just in how the business itself works 
that's unique?

Ben
Rolex is more vertically integrated than most. Once you absorb the cost of acquiring and 
bring everything in-house, you would assume that the margin would be a little bit higher 
because they're making everything themselves. Historically and generally speaking, there 
are very few brands that are as vertically integrated as Rolex. Weirdly, Seiko would be one 
brand. Seiko would be one. Patek would be another. But most brands are buying effectively 
everything. The component, the movement might be an in-house design. I'm using air 
quotes here. In-house design, but they're buying EBOS base calibers and modifying them 
significantly. There's margin there. They have to buy the products, to this day, or at least 
back in 2015, Rolex actually did not manufacture their own hands. I don't know why, but 
they were buying that from a company, I forgot the name of it. I think Fiedler SA. So Rolex 
was buying crystals in hands, but nothing else. Most brands are buying pretty much 
everything and then they're assembling it and putting it together. So then it just becomes 
like, okay, the production costs watch is the raw materials. It's the man hours. It's the straps. 
It's all that stuff. And then they would ship it out to a U.S. distributor at generally, probably 
about, I would say, 40% of what you'll see in the stores. So 40% of U.S. retail. And then the 
distributor would take 20% and then the retailer would take about 40% of that. So you can 
assume that your retailer is buying stuff at about 40% below what you're paying. And then 
the distributor is taking 20% of that. And then the actual producer of the watch is probably 
making 200% on that.

What Rolex Can Teach Us About Business
Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence

Page 33 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colos us, LLC.



Patrick
If you think about Rolex specifically, great watchmakers, in general, what do you think are the 
most important overall business lessons where you've seen how, let's say, Rolex specifically 
works at a base level. You've walked the factory floors. You're intimately familiar with the 
products. And then when you start thinking about other product categories, whatever, it doesn't 
need to just be luxury goods, what do you wish more businesses did or a certain way that they 
conducted themselves most based on what you've learned about Rolex?

Ben
I think continuity of design is paramount. That is probably really a simple thought. If you look 
at the Submariner I have on my desk, I have a 1954 Submariner and it looks pretty much like 
this. I have one from 1965 that looks just like this. And the idea that you can create a 
consumer good, and in fact, a completely superfluous kind of unnecessary consumer good, 
that becomes iconic, is everything. And if you look at its competitors, look at Omega, the 
Speedmaster, the washer went the moon, that is by far its most iconic product. And 
because they're making the Speedmaster just like they did in the 1960s, that is why it 
continues to have the following that it does. Look at cars. Porsche 911. 911s are trading well 
above retail right now for a variety of reasons. Wasn't always the case, but now they are. 
And you look at the Hermès Birkin bag. And it's just sticking with luxury. That bag has been 
around for 40 years and it will always be the iconic women's high end bag. So continuity of 
design, and we just did a podcast on this on Hodinkee, I think really is what creates multi-
generational demand. And I think with watches in particular, my origin story is I was given an 
Omega Speedmaster by my maternal grandfather, who was my hero, and that watch 
continues in some form or another to be made today. And so when my daughter who's on 
the other side of this wall, who's six months old, again is 25 or something I can say, "Hey, 
Georgie." That's her name. "Let's go out and get a watch that looks just like Dad's, that'll look 
just like your great-grandfather's, who you never met." And there's something really 
wonderful about that. Because, again, these are multi-generational items. Thinking long 
term, which is what Rolex does... Rolex is planning. I can guarantee they have their product 
mix figured out for 2035, guaranteed. Being able to not have to answer to shareholders, like 
so many of us do, and play for the long ball, I think is intoxicating for somebody like me. For 
example, in 2013, it was the 50th anniversary of the Daytona. At that point, the watch was a 
steel watch with a steel bezel.

All people wanted was a black bezel. That's it. That was all we were looking for. It wasn't too 
much to ask for. They didn't give it to us. They waited another two years. They gave us a 
platinum Daytona with a color bezel. It was kind of brown, ceramic bezel. And I just said, 
"Man, that's kind of shitty. 50th anniversary, they're not going to give us the thing that we 
want?" And it's just a black bezel. It doesn't seem like much. And then when the watch came 
out in 2015, we all said, "Great," and we're celebrating it, and that kind of set off a 
pandemonium. But they do these iterative things where like that black bezel now exists on 
the gold version of the Daytona, but not on a bracelet. And so if you want to buy a black 
bezel on a gold Daytona, it comes on a rubber strap. And I guarantee you next year, the year 
after that, we're going to get it on the bracelet. This idea of iterating to a degree that is so 
frustrating almost for the consumer, but it makes you so excited. And by the way, I want the 
gold Daytona on the bracelet with the black bezel. But because it didn't come out on the 
bracelet, I bought it on the rubber strap, even though it's not even really what I wanted. 
When it comes down the bracelet, I'm going to buy that, too. And the idea that they've 
created demand for product that people will buy several iterations of basically... This is not 
basically, really the same thing, is just super admirable. That somebody that creates 
products, which is what we do sometimes at Hodinkee, to do things in that level of detail 
and continue to foster the demand that far out base of supply is just remarkable. But again, 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 34 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssu
, LLC.



doing things in a way that is not shouting from rooftops, but the quality is there, and for 
people like me who know a lot about this product in particular, I can look you or anybody in 
the eye and say, "Yeah, if you can afford this watch, it's a great fucking product."

Patrick
What other brands in your world would you encourage people to study in this kind of detail to 
learn interesting lessons?

Ben
The other brand that I've mentioned a lot in this episode here is Omega. And I think Omega 
now is doing... They've learned a lot from Rolex, if I can say, and nobody's told me that, but I 
can just see it. The Omega Speedmaster, which went to the moon organically, it's not like 
they paid NASA for that, that is the greatest achievement of humankind. We sent men to 
the moon. It's insane. And there was a Rolex, to be clear, in contention for that, and NASA 
chose the Speedmaster over it. And that's just the facts. And so the Speedmaster was not, 
believe it or not, the commercial stalwart that it is for Omega now. Up until probably five 
years ago, it was the Seamaster. It was a dive watch. And Omega is actually a larger brand in 
China than Rolex is, believe it or not. They were driven by Chinese consumers. It was a lot of 
different colors and kind of interesting things. Then all of a sudden, the current president, a 
guy named Raynald Aeschlimann came in and said, "You know what? The Speedmaster is 
iconic. The Speedmaster went to the god damned moon. This should be the thing that 
people go crazy for. And this should be the product that can compete with Rolex. And they 
started doing these special editions, these limited editions, one of which was to celebrate 
15 years of Hodinkee. They did them with some other folks here and there. They did one 
with the Porsche Club of America. They did some special things with Snoopy, which is a tile 
of NASA. And then they stopped. They stopped. So no more limited editions, really. They do 
different editions, but not limited.

And now all of a sudden, the Speedmaster trades above retail. The Speedmaster is what 
everybody wants. And we're an authorized dealer from Omega and we can't keep them in 
stock. And so you look at the Omega Speedmaster, which, 10 years ago, was really kind of a 
secondary product. And now it's a primary product for the second biggest brand of the 
world, who sponsors the Olympics and James Bond and all these iconic things, and they're 
really paying attention to the enthusiast, which Hodinkee represents, which is who I 
represent, and the mass market folks, which is just the guy that wants a nice thing. I think 
Rolex has frustrated a lot of people, and this is no news to them. I know they know because 
you can no longer go in and buy the watch you want at all. And historically, the Daytona was 
always kind of difficult to get, but as a 25 year old guy that used to work in finance, which is 
when I started at Hodinkee, you make your first $5,000 bonus or whatever, and you go into 
the store and you buy your Submariner and like, "Okay, I'm an adult now. I have a 
Submariner." That doesn't exist anymore. And I think that's a real bummer for a lot of folks. 
And that certainly has made the aftermarket price of these things going in a significant way, 
but it really turns a lot of people off and Omega, TAG Heuer, Panerai, a lot of brands who 
really said, "You know what? If you can't get that Submariner, we'd be happy to sell you a 
watch. And by the way, here's some champagne and we're going to invite you to our next 
party and you might enjoy it."

Look, Rolex is an exceptional brand. I would never say they're not. I spent the last hour 
telling you why they're exceptional, but these are just watches. I think we have to remember 
that. I'm the first person to say that nobody needs a watch. So no doctor is prescribing us to 
buy watches. We're not curing cancer here. And so if somebody has worked so hard that 
they can afford a $10,000 Rolex and Rolex says, "Sorry, you can't have one," that's a really 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 35 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col
sus, LLC.



frustrating experience. And X percent of you says, "Well, maybe I just want you more now," 
but Y percent of you kind of says, "Well, you know what? Screw you, man. I'm going to go 
buy an Omega. I'm going to go buy a Panerai. And I'm going to love them and they're going 
to love me." It's just a matter of how much kind of ego there is involved there. Some people 
don't care at all. But I can tell you without question that several people that I know 
personally have been turned off, not only from Rolex, Patek, and Richard Mille and AP, 
because these are phenomenally expensive things. Rolex is on the low end side there. Let's 
talk about AP, which the watch you want is probably $30,000. Now, what you might want is 
$150,000, but to walk into a store and say, "Hey, my name's Ben. I've got $150,000 ready to 
go. I want to buy this thing," and be told, "Sorry. No. Who are you? Can I see your Instagram 
feed? What do you do for a living? Who do you know?"

How insulting must that be. And the answer is really fucking insulting to a lot of people. And 
a lot of people say, You know what? Fuck you. I'm just going to go buy it for $500 on a pre-
owned site, or I'm just going to not buy it at all. I'm going to take a nice vacation or buy a 
Ferrari instead." And I think this industry has really struggled with that. The market has been 
so buoyed by easy access to capital, I'll say, and the prices have just continued to go up and 
go up in a way... It's not normal. And it's not just true for watches. It's true for cars, wine, art, 
et cetera. And all of a sudden, when things tightened up a little bit this year, which they 
have people said, "Oh, wait a minute. Rolexes will not always go up value? Then I'm out. I'm 
just going to sell it." That's a shame. And I think, not just Rolex, but all luxury brands who 
have their chest puffed out really broadly now should just remember that everything is 
cyclical, and that if you have somebody that wants to buy a product from you that nobody 
needs, you should give them as much respect as possible because it doesn't last forever.

Patrick
We've talked a lot about the wonderful aspects of Rolex and some of these brands in general. 
What are maybe some negative lessons, things that you've seen them do through history, not 
just Rolex, but other brands like it, do you think are good, valuable lessons of what not to do? 
You've mentioned one there, which is what sparks my question.

Ben
The weakest link of any chain is always retail. Finding people, good sales people, is 
remarkably hard because you're selling stuff. And a lot of the folks that are able to afford 
this stuff, frankly, are incredibly intelligent, incredibly well versed in the world, know 
everything, know everyone. If they don't, they're going to go on Hodinkee and read all about 
it so they do know everything. And you get salespeople that aren't used to that. And I think 
you have people that are selling product in a way that is so counter to what these things 
represent. Just using what I have on my desk as an example. I bought this GMT with a good 
friend of mine. He had just signed a deal to play in a band, a very famous band. And I had 
just signed my seed ground in fundraising for Hodinkee, which was a huge deal for me. And 
we went into the Rolex store on Fifth Avenue. We bought the exact same watch together. 
So this watch has nothing to do with how much it costs or anything. It has everything to do 
with that success in my life, that success in my friend's life. And to be told, "No," in that 
moment, imagine we were there together trying to celebrate these achievements for both 
of us. And we were like, "Sorry, you can't have anything." And at that point, there were two 
of the exact same watch sitting in the case so it was easy. But right now, if we were to do it 
again, we'd probably get told, "No." It's so, so demoralizing and insulting. I hesitate to use 
the word enemy, but you could create an enemy for life as a consumer. That is crazy.

Rolex knows it's a problem and they are doing everything they can to meet it. And I believe 
them when they tell me that they're creating more watches than ever before so that 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 36 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



demand paces it. But there needs to be a better way. And frankly, I don't know what that 
way is. Maybe it's eCommerce. I'm a believer in that. I don't know. Maybe it's actual waiting 
lists, where people can actually put their name down and say, "Okay, this person's at number 
1,123." When you get to that thing, you'll get the watch. That doesn't exist. And the idea that 
the waiting lists are even referenced by Rolex today is nonsense. There's no such thing. If 
you know somebody at Rolex, you'll get the watch. If you bought a bunch of watches that 
they can't sell, then you'll get the one that they can sell. It's a gift basically. And again, I want 
to be clear. Rolex is not alone. Several brands that are very hot right now are doing the same 
thing. But man, both my parents were teachers. The fact that I have more than one Rolex is 
still shocking. I'm just happy to be here. And so I'd think of, if I wasn't me in the watch world, 
but I had made a few thousand bucks and I wanted to buy one of these things, how 
disappointed you would be, how angry you would be that you just worked your off for the 
last 40 years to get to a point where you can afford this thing and you're told "No"? I think 
that is a major problem. And I think that is going to continue to be a problem for a long time 
unless somebody changes.

Patrick
It's a really interesting balance of wanting it to be something aspirational, but once you achieve 
a certain bar, to be able to do it. It's a fine line that you have to walk as a luxury brand. Really, 
really interesting.

Ben
Look, it's integrity and its honesty. If somebody came to me and they knocked in mind door 
and said, "Hey, we want to buy your house." I'd probably say, "Well, I really appreciate that, 
but we're not looking to sell it. But in five years when my daughter's grown and we need a 
bigger house, I'll give you a call." I would call that person. And I think that person would 
respect me for saying, "Not right now, but I'll give you a shout when we're ready." What 
goes on now is not at all that. It's basically they say, "Hey, sir, please give me your name and 
we'll reach out if and when we have a product available," which doesn't mean a thing. It 
doesn't mean a thing. If you're a celebrity, if you're an entrepreneur, if you're somebody that 
has a million Instagram followers, they're going to call you soon, and if you're not, you're not 
going to get a call at all. And I think that is when things get really dicey, when people that 
don't have purchase history is kind of the new street credit in the watch world. Here's 
another kind of interesting situation where a lot of brands are closing down authorized 
dealers. So they're closing stores. So let's say you, Patrick, were the number one Audemars 
Piguet client at some dealer in Ohio or something.

And you had bought a million dollars worth of APs from this authorized dealer in Ohio for 
over the past 10 years. And then that dealer got closed. And then you walked into the AP 
boutique on Seventh Street and said, "Hey, my name is Patrick. Look, I've spent a million 
bucks with this dealer that no longer exists. Can I have the new ceramic Tourbillon," or 
whatever. "We're so pleased for you to come in, blah, blah. We'd love to chat. But you don't 
have a purchase history here so we're going to have to put you to the bottom of the list." 
How would you feel about that? Imagine you've been buying that product in the correct me 
from an authorized dealer for a decade and you just got told you had to start all over again. 
And that is what's happening in the watch world right now. And I'm not singling out AP or 
anybody, but it's the arrogance of some of these brands that are very hot to think that they 
can continue to treat people that way even though everything is cyclical. And I've seen all 
these brands trade below retail, just like we're seeing them trade above retail right now.

Patrick

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 37 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colos us, LLC.



I'll certainly remember this conversation for this idea of companies that, as you get to know 
them, you like them more, which is probably quite a rare feature of any company. Typically, the 
thing you see on the front of it is the best version of the thing almost by definition. They're 
going to surface the most attractive, interesting stories, elements, whatever, but this idea that 
I'll think of those five floors below ground is a great lesson. Ben, this has been so much fun. 
What an interesting brand. I can't think of anything like it that's a nonprofit, that's had this 
endurance, that has this global recognition and style. Thank you so much for taking the time 
today to break it down with us.

Ben
It's my pleasure. It's been a lot of fun.

Introduction
Patrick
Today, we're breaking down one of the strongest brands in the world, Rolex. Founded in the UK 
in 1905 under the name Wilsdorf and Davis, Rolex has become the leading name in luxury 
watches. But while the company's products are iconic, the business itself is highly secretive. 
Owned by a foundation and run as a nonprofit entity, little is known about Rolex. To unlock the 
secrets, we're delighted to be joined by Ben Clymer, the founder of Hodinkee and an expert on 
all things luxury watches. Ben has had rare access to Rolex and the people behind the 
manufacturer, making him the perfect person to dissect the business with us. Please enjoy this 
excellent breakdown of Rolex.

What Makes a Rolex Special
Patrick
So Ben, I was trying to think of an appropriate first question to break down Rolex. I think it has to 
be, what is your favorite Rolex watch ever?

Ben
Oh man, that's a really complex question for a gentleman such as myself. The Daytona is 
probably my favorite Rolex as an object. There are Rolexes that mean a lot to me from a 
sentimental point of view, being my grandfather's, my father's, et cetera. But the Daytona as 
a thing has always been the peak of my fascination from the early 6239s, which is the first 
generation Daytona back before it even said Daytona on the dial. I wrote a story probably 10 
years ago plus at this point on Hodinkee about those. There was some curiosity within Rolex 
about what they should call it. And this was before they sponsored Daytona. In the original 
name of the Cosmograph, the chronograph, for racing was Le Mans. It's called Rolex for a 
variety of reasons, but one of which is Rolex is Rolex in any language. And Le Mans, with 
that silent S, the Rolex marketing department as small as it was in 1963 said, "You know 
what? That could turn off the American market." And if you've ever tried to pronounce 
Audemars Piguet as Audemars Piaget, which is about 50% of humanity, you realize how 
uncomfortable that can be. So they quickly went to the Daytona. So the Daytona as an 
object is probably my favorite. I will say that the watch that I'm actually wearing right now, 
which was actually the first modern Rolex I've ever bought, which is the Pepsi GMT in white 
gold, I actually just realized I bought two months after we published the Inside the Rolex 
story that I wrote in 2015, is probably the one that means the most to me because I've just 
had it the longest and it was to celebrate something personal at the time.

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 38 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Coloss
s, LLC.



Patrick
So say a bit more about the Daytona. What is it about it as a physical object that you think 
makes it special?

Ben
First of all, I'm a very serious car guy, or I shouldn't say I'm a serious car guy, but I love cars a 
lot. And the Daytona, not just with Rolex, but with all watches, that is about cosplay. And 
the idea of you can be whoever you want to be. I'm this quiet dork from upstate New York. 
In my mind, I'm Paul Newman and I'm driving a vintage Ferrari or vintage Porsche at Le Mans 
or something super badass. And the Daytona is the quickest way in my mind to getting 
there. And then as somebody who is obsessive about things, as you can imagine, being that 
I started a blog about watches and now here we are, the Daytona has the most interesting 
history in the sense that it is, and it was, not produced, the movement was not produced, by 
Rolex until relatively recently, in the 2000s. Whereas, everything else, almost from day one, 
was produced by Rolex. So the Dayjust, the Day-Date, the Submariner, GMP, those were all 
Rolex movements. Daytona was not, which I think is just fascinating. And it gives you 
something to do. So in younger years when I was taking the subway, I would time how long 
my subway ride was or how long it took to cook the chicken in the oven, et cetera. But 
ultimately, the idea of a professional watch, which is Rolex sports watches, with a dial that 
didn't have to be black, all the other ones are black, GMP is a black dial, Submariner's a black 
dial, aesthetically was different. It was also smaller than most of the sports watches with the 
exception of the Explorer, which is the 36 millimeter watch. And it just had a lot of story that 
went with it, one of which, of course being the fact that Paul Newman himself wore one and 
that's of course the most expensive wrist watch ever sold not for charity.

There's just so much about the Daytona, but on a personal level, it came down to the 
aesthetics, the connection to motor sport, and then just simply the story behind it of that it 
was really not a success at all. And chronographs, whether it was Rolex, Heuer or Patek, 
anybody, these were really engineering focused or motor sport focused watches. They were 
not for consumers. They were not for guys like you and me, unless we were driving at tracks 
on the weekend. And similarly, with the Submariner, which I have right here, the idea of a 
desk diver, which is somebody that sits at a desk but pretends to dive, is really a very, very 
modern, very recent introduction. And back then, you bought a Submariner if you were 
actually diving. It wasn't because I'm going to my pool in upstate New York on the 
weekends. You were really diving. Otherwise, you were buying a small dress watch. And 
whether it's Rolex or Patek or any other, Vacheron, AP, Omega, the most expensive 
watches, historically speaking, in the mid-century of last century, were not sports watches 
or not even complicated watches. They were ultra slim watches. So if you look at Patek or 
AP or Vacheron being the three big boys at high end, the most expensive watches were not 
the perpetual calendars of chronographs, they were the ultra slim watches. And that 
represented the highest end version of watchmaking at the time. We're starting to see that 
a little bit now. Actually, Richard Mille just this past week introduced the thinnest 
mechanical watch ever made and it's $2 million. And Bulgari released one earlier this year 
that was, up until last week, the thinnest watch ever made and that was about $500,000, 
where the standard Bulgari would be, say, 15. So different times, for sure.

Patrick
You said something interesting, which is one of the jobs to be done for buying a Rolex is this 
cosplay idea of transporting you to a more interesting or fanciful lifestyle. Maybe you could 
describe, before we get to Rolex specifically, the brand, all the jobs that you think high end 
watches do for people. I don't want to take for granted that one of them is tell the time, but you 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 39 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ss
s, LLC.



can buy a Casio for 10 bucks that can tell the time.

Ben
Or your iPhone.

Patrick
Or anything. There's lots of ways to know what time it is. So describe to me through history, and 
especially today, all the main reasons you think people buy high end watches.

Ben
Historically speaking, digital time telling didn't exist before 1969. Full stop. When they were 
going to the moon, it wasn't like they could buy a Casio or use an iPhone. They needed a 
mechanical watch to strap on the outside of their flight suit. When you were racing Le Mans 
or the Mille Miglia in the 1950s, again, there was no such thing as digital time keeping so you 
wore a watch to do that. The functionality of it is obvious but I think it's worth repeating 
here because a lot of people don't remember that 100 years ago, 50 years ago, 60 years 
ago, there was no option. You were wearing a watch, and it was a mechanical watch, to do 
everything in your life. And so the idea of me looking at my Rolex now and then comparing it 
to my MacBook here, there was no option to do that. Guys set this watch once with 
probably an hourly bell on the TV or the radio and that was it. And then you would just 
assume that this would be accurate for basically in perpetuity. And then beyond that, going 
back to the earliest, earliest watches, the Marie Antoinette days, and she was one of the 
first supporters of what we call haute horology, I'll say it with an American accent, which is 
high end, really beyond basic time telling devices. And what I mean by that is you can buy a 
mechanical watch, and Hodinkee sells mechanical watch for about $150. So that's probably 
a Timex, or it might be a Swatch Sistem51, which are not battery powered. These are 
mechanical watches. Those are machine assembled. They're basically disposable. You throw 
them out when they're broken. You don't fix them. There's no what we call finishing or 
finissage, which is effectively aesthetic flourishes that differentiate those type of watches 
from, say, Rolex or Omega, which I would classify as mass market luxury, but the most long 
lasting of anything out there, and then what we call haute horology, which is slightly more 
artistic. You get complications, you get finishing of movements. I don't have any here with 
me. But something like a Patek, an AP, a Vacheron, an A. Lange & Söhne, et cetera, I would 
classify those as a category, frankly, significantly higher in terms of finishing and 
significantly higher in terms of human touch than Rolex or Omega.

On a Rolex, it's a closed case back. There are no Rolexes with open case backs but there are 
some Omegas. So Rolex is the number one brand in the world. Omega is the number two 
brand in the world, historically speaking, by sales. Omegas will have some open case backs, 
on the new Speedmaster, for example, which went to the moon. You can see the 
movement. So a lot of nerds, and now more of the nerds, want to see what's actually inside 
this watch. And it's simply because you're paying six or seven grand for this thing, you want 
to know what you're getting, you want to see that human touch to it. And that is why a lot 
of people are interested in high end watch making today. More recently, and this is very 
recent, really over the past two or three years, you get people that are buying on spec, on 
speculation, on the idea that these are safe investments, which they remain to this day. And 
that is really a new thing for me. So Hodinkee, our business, is 15 years old or approaching 
15 years old, and really, nobody thought of watches as investment vehicles in 2008, 2009. I 
shouldn't say very few. Some people at the very high end. And now, it's kind of common 
practice. And I do interviews with the Bloombergs of the world and the Wall Street Journals 
of the world almost weekly at this point talking about the ROI of not just Rolex, but AP and 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 40 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col s us, LLC.



Omega and TAG Heuer, et cetera. There are several reasons why somebody might buy a 
watch. And frankly, that's why it was always so compelling to me as an ex finance guy, and 
why I wanted to get in this space, was it could be interesting, we'll say, to somebody that 
works in finance from an ROI perspective. It could be interesting to somebody in design 
from an aesthetic perspective. An engineer from a manufacturing perspective. For 
somebody like me, who's an externalist, from a storytelling perspective. There's so many 
reasons why you could be interested in it, but the reasons why that people continue to buy 
is that they are so forever lasting.

This watch I've had for seven years, I've never had it serviced. And frankly, I probably won't 
need to service it for another seven years. And when my daughter, who was just born six 
months ago, is my age, 40 years from now, she'll be able to wear this watch that I'm 
showing to you on this Zoom call right now. There's something so wonderful about the 
longevity of these things in a way nothing can replicate. And even a great car, we'll say a 
Mercedes or a Porsche or something like that, you really need to maintain those. And 
frankly, the internal combustion engine 50 years from now will probably not even be 
serviceable. Jewelry is a different thing because there's craftsmanship there. And I have a 
lot of respect for great artisans of jewelry. But there's no engineering. There's no motion 
there. And I think what's so remarkable about Rolex as the archetype, but all mechanical 
watches, is that I could put this on my wrist and if I decided to sell all my other watches, I 
could wear this every day while I sleep, while I shower, while I work out and it would 
continue to tell time for me and it would rely on me as much as I rely on it. I think there's 
something beautiful in that, that kind of symbiotic relationship between the device and the 
man. And it's just a wonderful kind of totem to a different way of living.

Building Luxury Brands
Patrick
It's such a fascinating set of different things and considerations. I'm also curious how you think 
about the luxury strategy itself from a marketing standpoint behind watches. I remember 
reading this book called The Luxury Strategy, which I recommend to anyone interested in this 
topic. And one of the ideas that stands out from that book is that when marketing a luxury 
product, you want the ratio of the number of people aware of something to those that actually 
have it to be as wide as possible. Because one of the jobs you're doing when you buy a really 
fancy watch is you want other people to know that it's a marker of success, sort of like a 
signaling function to watches. How do you think that piece of this has evolved over time?

Ben
That has become ever present and I think more so now than ever before. Just speaking of 
my own experience 15 years ago when I started Hodinkee, nobody knew what a vintage 
Rolex was. If I may say, we were the first people to give any attention at scale to vintage 
Rolex and collectible Rolexes. Basically, if you went to an auction Christie's, Sotheby's 
auction in New York, there would be about seven dealers in there and they would just be 
buying and selling amongst themselves. Now you go and it's a black tie affair with 
champagne and several well known personalities from entertainment and sports are sitting 
in the audience. It's a totally different thing. Again, we can talk about the origins of Rolex 
and how they were at the forefront of this. They were effectively the first people to have 
real marketing dollars put behind a watch. There were people that ran ads here and there, 
Longines was a big one, with Charles Lindbergh. But Rolex did it in a concerted way and 
they have continued to do that in a way that is simply just unmatched by others.

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 41 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossus, LLC.



And I think what's so remarkable, Rolex was always the number one brand in the United 
States, historically speaking, from the 1950s to today. But if you look back, say, I don't know, 
15, 16 years, so pre 2008. So the financial crisis of 2008, which is actually how I started 
Hodinkee, when this all kind came to be, was a real turning point for Rolex in the US because 
when all the other brands, their competitors being Omega, which is a huge, huge brand, TAG 
Heuer, which is a good size brand, the folks that you would think, they were there, they 
were present in the conversation with Rolex. They pulled back on marketing when people 
stopped buying after 2008, when Lehman collapsed. Rolex did not. Rolex put the pedal 
down. And it was really 2008, 2009, 2010, which really elevated Rolex in the United States 
to a level that it is today. If you speak to them directly, they'll credit with that period as kind 
of the turning point for them in the US.

Patrick
Maybe before we go into the history, which is so interesting and really important, we could just 
do a level set for the audience on Rolex the business and just some basics like how many 
watches do they produce a year, the revenue that they produce a year, maybe say a little bit 
about their very unique business structure, which is certainly shocking to me and I think will 
shock some people too that aren't familiar with it. Just level set us on the size and type of the 
Rolex as a business.

Ben
And I want to be completely clear, and I'm sure Rolex will listen to this, so I want to be clear 
for them and for the audiences that they don't communicate anything so this is all 
speculative. The information that I'll provide and that I'm sure you read is completely 
speculative. We have a good idea of what they might produce and what the revenue might 
be. The assumption is is that Rolex is making just north of around a million watches per year 
with an average wholesale price of around $7,000. So you can do the math there to kind of 
give you an idea of size and revenue. And a million watches per year is a lot, but it's not the 
biggest by quantity. Apple, of course, would be bigger than that. Arguably, if you included 
Apple, they would be an even bigger watch brand than Rolex, but different thing obviously. 
But if you were to combine, for example, the entire Swatch group, which ranges from 
Swatch to Breguet, including Omega, it would be a larger business than Rolex, in theory. But 
again, Swatch is a publicly traded company, you can see exactly what their revenue is, 
whereas Rolex is, as I think you've alluded to, Rolex is quite the opposite. Rolex is in fact run 
by something called the Hans Wilsdorf Foundation, which was founded in 1945 when the 
founder, Hans Wilsdorf, set it up to basically be effectively, a nonprofit run by a group of 
families that are still highly involved with the business today that have, I would say, 
effectively zero public interaction. I'm pretty close with Rolex and I'm pretty close with the 
watch industry you could say and I have met, I think, one board member, one time. That was 
not by design. I think I met him at a bar and I was like, "Oh, you're so and so," and he said, 
"Yes." These people are in fact, the most powerful people in watches and nobody even 
knows their name. Nobody even knows what they look like. I happen to because this is my 
job, but most people have no clue who's really pulling the strings at Rolex. There's a 
wonderful CEO named Jean-Frederic Dufour, who used to be the president of Zenith, which 
is an LVMH brand and he is absolutely the base and brain behind much of Rolex, but there is 
a board there and like any board, they have a different kind of influence over the brand.

Rolex is effectively a nonprofit, some say one of the largest nonprofits in the world, which I 
would believe. There are dozens and dozens of rumors that you may have heard, such as 
they've got the largest private art collection next to the Vatican, or they own more real 
estate. They make more money in real estate than they do in watches. Any of those things 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 42 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colo
sus, LLC.



could be true. What I can say with the utmost certainty is that they will never reveal any of 
that to be true, even if it is. They're not the type of brand, type of company that will ever 
stand on the rooftop and shout about anything. I mentioned this in the story that I wrote in 
2015, whereas most brands, they're trying to create stories where there aren't any, a lot of 
brands will say a watch is in-house and you manufacture it in-house when it's not. Rolex 
doesn't do any of that. In fact, what's so remarkable and I found this out on my own, doing 
my own research for that story in 2015, they will make several updates to products at some 
significant cost to themselves and not change the retail price and not even tell anybody 
about it and the only reason that I found out was when doing research for that story, I spoke 
to an independent watchmaker who is in New York City and is one of the best watchmakers 
in the country, if not the world, and he said, he works on Rolex, as well as other brands. 
These are the changes that they made to their movements without anybody knowing. By 
the way, these other brands that are communicating about LIGA, which is a manufacturing 
technique that allows you to have frictionless gears, a brand sent out a press release about 
that. Then, he came to find out that Rolex had been doing that for five years. It was in half 
their watches already. That's what's so wonderful about Rolex is they just are so remarkably 
Swiss. They are so conservative and thoughtful in the way that they communicate. When I 
wrote that story in 2015, I was one of the first journalists who ever be invited inside Rolex's 
manufacturing headquarters in Bienne, Switzerland, which is what movements are made. 
They just are not out there to talk about themselves really ever. It's incredibly charming. The 
luxury world is so much about Instagram and influencers and people touting how 
prestigious any brand might be and Rolex is just quietly the most prestigious.

Patrick
It is so ridiculously singular. I cannot think of another example of a company that I want to come 
to vertical integration and quality and some of these key brand elements and real elements of a 
Rolex in the absence of a profit motive over such a long period of time. There just aren't other 
stories like this, where there's such dominance.

Ben
The only other two that come to my mind are two brands that I know of. One of which 
would be Patek Philippe, which is another family. It's owned by the Sterns completely. 
There's not any outside capital. Again, family run, Geneva, very, very close to the Rolex 
group, obviously, physically and emotionally, I should say. They continue to just do things in 
a way that is different than everybody else. Then, the other one would be Hermès, of 
course. They have some outside capital, but effectively controlled by one family, has been 
for 100 years. Hermès is part of the fashion life cycle. They are at fashion shows and they 
get into, you can buy an Hermès watch box or ash tray or lounge share or suitcase. They're a 
little bit broader, but their commitment to quality and the way that they've integrated is 
exceptional, I can say, but Patek and Rolex, I would say are unique in that way.

The History and Evolution of Rolex
Patrick
Maybe you can give us the, I don't really care how long it is, as long as you want to make it 
because it's so damn interesting, the history of Rolex, the brand and the company, its founding 
and its key timeline milestones.

Ben
Rolex is younger than most other brands. It's younger than Omega. It's younger than 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 43 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssus, LLC.



Vacheron by 150 years. It's younger than Patek. In the Swiss watch world, I wouldn't call it a 
baby by any means, but not one of these grandfathers. I mean, Vacheron was founded in 
1755. That's older than the United States of America. Rolex was founded by a guy named 
Hans Wilsdorf, who's Austrian, but he was a total anglophile. He really just was obsessed 
with the United Kingdom in the early part of the 1900s. He goes into the UK and starts a 
company called Wilsdorf & Davis in 1905. Back then, you have to remember that, forget 
digital watch making. Wrist watches were not a thing. The wrist watch was really a product 
of World War I, which was guys and trenches, trench watches, were strapping pocket 
watches to the wrist so that they didn't have to pull out of their pocket. It was a little bit 
more complex, but that's it at a high level. Wilsdorf, in 1905, decides to focus on wrist 
watches, which is crazy. I mean, it was a little bit, frankly like Elon Musk focusing on EVs 10, 
15 years ago. People just weren't ready for it. He committed to doing the wrist watch in the 
early part of the 1900s, 1905, 1908 and in 1908, he creates a company called Rolex. Again, 
there's lots of hearsay on why it's Rolex. I think at the very least it's safe to say that he chose 
that word because it's the same pronunciation in all languages. Some people say it's the 
sound it makes. There's no confirmation on that, but effectively what he does is he's just the 
distributor. He's not making anything from 1905 to about 1908.

In '08, he buys a movement, which is what powers watch from a company called Aegler, A-
E-G-L-E-R, which we'll get back to later. They're still around today, buys a movement, puts it 
in a case made by himself and sends it off to, it's called an observatory, but effectively what 
it is, it's a testing facility, effectively a nonprofit that says, these watches or time telling 
devices, clock, Marine chronometer or whatever, are accurate within, we'll say X and Y, 
effectively saying, these are the most precise time telling devices on earth, typically done 
for Marine chronometers and if you know anything about this history of longitude, like that 
is effectively how longitude was discovered. This is just paramount to basically all 
exploration of the time period. Up until that point, no wrist watches had ever even been 
submitted to this thing called the QA, which is a British testing facility at that point. In 1908, 
he does that with an Aegler powered watch. It's a 44 day test and it is given the QA 
certificate. Again, nobody had ever done it. Some years later, about 10 years later, he 
submitted 136 movements back to the QA. I think 24 of them were cased in 34 millimeter 
gold cases and then another 112 were in what we call boy size, which is really very small. I 
mean, at this point, it would look like a nickel, but these are effectively the formula one cars 
of watch movements. There were other watch movements at the time that to you and me 
and most people, would look exactly the same, but these were high performance calibers 
and they did it with a special escapement. Escapement is basically how time telling was 
regulated. These were effectively the formula one cars of watchmaking and they were done 
in a way that was very, even back then, very Rolex. There was really no indication that these 
were anything special on a dial, besides it would say QA on them. They're around. You can 
buy them today for really less than you might think.

Once he had been given the QA certificates for the first wrist watch ever, he decided really 
to focus on three tenants of watchmaking, which really were not at all prevalent in that day 
at all, because it was really about utility. The watch can tell you the time pretty well or it was 
about luxury. At that point, we're talking the Cartiers, Patek Philippes, complications, really. 
History tenants of manufacturing, which remain true to this day, would be precision, 
accuracy, waterproofness, which didn't really exist at the time, and then self winding. What I 
mean by that is ability to not have to wind the watch manually. Precision was done. We've 
covered that. These watches were based on QA. They came up with a new escapement to 
make them more precise. Waterproofness, I think, goes back to the question you asked 
about five minutes ago, which is, how did you get something that more people know about 
that basically can afford or confine? He created something called the oyster case and now 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 44 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lossus, LLC.



almost all Rolexes with the exception of the Cellini line, use an oyster case. That basically 
just means a waterproof case. Nobody was doing it at the time. Omega had something that 
was pretty close and actually predates the oyster case, but never really took off in the same 
way. Instead of using seals, it was almost like a locking system. It didn't really take off, but 
effectively there was this woman named Mercedes Gleitz, who was a typist, of all things, 
basically a secretary in the UK and she had swum the English channel successfully, the first 
woman to swim the English channel successfully.

Hans Wilsdorf, the founder said, "Hey, wouldn't it be cool if this woman, A, she's a woman, B, 
she's doing this amazing feat that no one had ever done before. Wouldn't it be cool if she 
wore the watch around her neck?" She didn't wear it on her wrist to be clear. She put her 
around her neck and she attempted to swim the English channel. She actually didn't 
successfully do it. She failed, but nobody really cared because she had already done it 
before. He took out an ad celebrating the fact that this watch was around this woman's 
neck for 10 hours in the English channel and the time keeping was flawless. That solidified 
Rolex as A, a household name because the oyster case had been validated in the English 
channel with this early brand ambassador, I guess you would call her. That was a huge deal 
and I think one of the earliest examples of real marketing by any luxury brand or any brand 
really at all, and then the final tenant would be self winding, which is, I would equate it to the 
automatic transmission. When the automatic transmission came around, all of a sudden, 
driving a car became a hell of a lot easier. It just became wider accepted, et cetera. Prior to, 
I guess it was around 19, I'm going to say, 30 something that Rolex patented the first self 
winding movement. To be clear, there was somebody called John Harwood that actually had 
a different self winding movement first. I think that was in the twenties and his idea was to 
make a hammer. Some of them would bounce back and forth like this to continue to power 
the watch. Rolex said, let's go a different array. Let's create a rotor, so a weight that would 
oscillate around inner circle to power the watch.

That worked and Rolex had, actually I remember the date. It was 1933 because it had a 20 
year patent on it and Patek Philippe, which was another stall watch of traditional 
watchmaking, saw this and said, "Oh shit, we need to do that too," but they couldn't actually 
release anything until 20 years later because of the patent. The Patek 2526, which is their 
first self winding watch that came out in 1953. That's a different thing all together, but 
effectively, Hans Wilsdorf said, "I want the watches to be precise," check with the QA. "I 
want them to be waterproof," check with the oyster case, "And I want them to be self 
winding," check with the perpetual. If you see oyster perpetual on any Rolex, which you'd 
see in all Rolexes now, oysters are waterproof. Perpetual is the self winding. From there, 
Rolex went out to make watches and they were doing things very much in a similar style to 
everyone else at that time until the early fifties. In the post-war era, post World War II era, 
they created their first sports watch. By sports watch, the technical term is professional 
watch by Rolex nomenclature. It's the Submariner, which is the diver's watch, which is 1953. 
It's the GMT, which is the pilot's watch, which is 1955. Explorer I, which is an Explorer's 
watch or an all day everyday watch, which is 53 as well. Then, you had the Daytona in 1963. 
Later, you had the Sea-Dweller in 67, which is a beef up version of the Sub. Then, the 
Explorer II in, I guess, 1970 or so. Those are the watches that I think most people now think 
of when they think of watch. You see rotating bezel in most cases. You see a black dial in 
most cases. You see an oyster bracelet, which is a very wonderfully produced bracelet with 
an oyster lock bracelet. That is really when things change.

To be clear, Rolex was not alone. There were other brands doing it. Some would say earlier, 
some would say around the same time, but the Blancpain Fifty Fathoms is credited to 1953. 
The Omega Seamaster 300 and 120 are around the same time as well. They were not alone 
and you have to remember that even Rolex in the watch industry in that period, it was really 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 45 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lossus, LLC.



a smattering of different suppliers. If you look at, for example, and I wrote about this several 
times over the past few years, if you look at, say the Rolex Daytona from 1963 and the Heuer 
Carrera from 1963, it uses the exact same movement and I'm saying the exact same 
movement, and that's a Valjoux 72. Same case maker, same dial maker, same hand maker. 
What is the actual difference? The assembly was done by Rolex and the assembly was done 
by Heuer, but the product itself was really very similar. If you look at early Seamasters and 
early Submariners, a lot of similarity there. The difference was of course the oyster case, but 
that was how watch making was done. If you look at say, example of Patek Philippe 2499, 
that's based on a Valjoux movement. You don't think of that. You think of Patek as Patek. 
This is the holy grail, but up until really, I mean the 2000s, they were using what you call an 
Ebauche movement, which is just really movement blank and then, it would be finished by 
Patek or finished by AP or Vacheron or whoever. Rolexes were really, I would say, finished to 
a higher quality than most, but I mean, any good Blancpain or any good Omega would do 
much of what Rolex was doing. It was really not until much, much later in the seventies first 
when we had the Quartz crisis, which is effectively the creation of Quartz, which is analog 
time, but with a battery, which is dramatically more precise, I mean, dramatically more 
precise than mechanical watch making.

What is interesting to think about, and I give full credit to my old colleague, Joe Thompson, 
who's the legend in the watch writing world, is the Japanese came in with Quartz, Seiko 
created it, effectively, came in and there was a war between Swiss mechanical watch 
making and Quartz analog timekeeping. To be clear, the Swiss lost. The Swiss lost by a 
country mile. All of a sudden, those guys that were buying a Rolex or Omega or a Heuer, 
because they were the most precise thing in the world just said, "You know what" why 
would I do that? I can buy a Quartz watch that is 10 times more accurate," 10 times, and by 
the way, you don't need to have good service. You just swap out the new battery or 
whatever all the time and that decimated the Swiss watch industry to a point where very, 
very few brands were producing things at a profit of any kind. Jack Heuer, whose family 
owned TAG Heuer before it was TAG. It was just Heuer at the time. In his biography, I mean, 
he talks almost going into bankruptcy. If you talk to Gerry Stern, whose father Philippe Stern 
and his grandfather have owned Patek for generations. In the late seventies, they had to 
borrow with their bank.

Patrick
It's existential.

Ben
Yeah, this was real. It wasn't just the smaller brands. Patek had issues. Heuer had issues. 
Rolex was really smart in that, through that period of real turmoil when, I would say, their 
chief competitor Omega decided to make some Quartz watches, decided to make some 
funky looking things, Rolex stayed the course, and yes, they did make Quartz watches. The 
Beta 21, which was a Swiss conglomerates answer to Quartz, is the most expensive Quartz 
watch ever made. I mean like thousands and thousands of dollars, they said, "We're going to 
focus on what we do best," and the focus went away from precision and accuracy and time 
telling to luxury. That is when you start seeing the gold Rolex on, I hate to say it, but the 
used car salesman and the gold Rolex became the thing, seventies and eighties, opulence, 
you understand what the eighties were, of course. It just changed what Rolex was, but by 
the way, it worked and it allowed them to continue to be relevant when everybody else 
being Omega, Patek to a degree, Vacheron, these brands really struggled. That is why so 
many of them ended up in conglomerates. In the eighties and nineties, when watches were, 
mechanical watches, were really not doing so hot, a lot of folks came in and bundled them 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 46 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossu
, LLC.



all up. Richemont owns a bunch of the great ones, including Vacheron. Swatch owns 
everything from Swatch to Blancpain, Breguet, Omega. It was a time of great challenge for 
sure. Rolex, they struggled as well, never to the degree that the others did, but it was not 
great for them. Then, the nineties started to come around and Rolex had a CEO by the name 
of Patrick Heiniger. His father was actually also CEO too, to give you an idea of how things 
work at Rolex. And he said, "I want to take Rolex in-house," and he was really the first to do, 
frankly well before Patek or well before anybody else. Rolex was using 27 different suppliers 
to make, say, Submariner.

After he was done with it, they're using four and now, those four are completely owned by 
Rolex. There are four different production facilities, two in Geneva, one in, what I would call, 
Proper Geneva one and Plan-les-Ouates, which is a little bit outside and then there's one in 
Chêne-Bourg, which does dials and there's one in Bienne, which makes the movements. 
What's so amazing is, Rolex, to me, the secret sauce is equal parts case, equal parts 
movement. The case is, you can reverse engineer if you're a competitor and say, "Okay, 
what's an oyster case? It's got this. It's got that. It's polished there. Seals are done by X, Y, 
and Z." Movements are a different thing entirely. And what's amazing is Rolex Geneva, 
which is basically dials, cases, bracelets, all that stuff, and Rolex BN, which is up in the 
mountains in Vallée de Joux, had a handshake deal for 70 years. And I mean, an actual 
handshake deal that the calibers made by what was then called Aegler, who made the first 
movement for Hans Wilsdorf, that company was making movements solely for Rolex 
Geneva based on nothing but a handshake. And I mean that literally. There was nothing in 
writing up until 2004, which is just insane to think about. I mean, Rolex was certainly a 
multi-billion dollar a year business before then. And up until 2004, there was no contract in 
place to say that Aegler couldn't make movements for Omega or TAG Heuer or whoever. 
And so in 2004, Rolex said, "You know what? Enough's enough. Let's get married here," and 
they purchased the company. And so now Rolex BN is basically what Aegler was up in the 
mountains until 2004. And so Rolex now has four different production facilities. As I wrote 
that story, I was among the first to be invited inside the movement manufacturing, which is 
really the source of the IP. That is where the sausage is made, so to speak. Just remarkable. 
If you haven't read the story, it's on Hodinkee called Inside The Manufacturer: Visiting All 
Four Rolex Locations. It was remarkable. As I started out in that story, this was 10 years ago 
or seven years ago, I was a lover of watches.

I was a lover of Rolex and I had four Rolexes then than had anything else at that point. None 
of them were as old as I was. They were all considerably older than me. And it's funny, I 
reread the story to prepare for this interview. And now since then, I've bought more modern 
Rolexes than I have vintage. And the world is just a different place. But once you see 
everything that Rolex does to a watch, and what I mean by that is the fact that they have 
their own foundry, even the steel, not just the gold and precious metals, even the steel on 
Rolex is proprietary and it's made by Rolex. It's 904L. It's wild. They make their own gold. It's 
called Everose if it Rolex gold. It's just remarkable. And what I think is even more telling of 
what Rolex is about is that one of their facilities they actually have, and I mean this literally, 
more than two Nobel prize-winning scientists on staff working on watches. Think about 
what that must mean from a material science perspective. The innovation done by Rolex is 
just above and beyond anything I've seen. I've been to every watch maker in the world. I've 
been to several car manufacturers doing this. I've been all over. I've been inside Hermès. 
There's just nothing like this. They create machines to test their machines that make 
watches. They have their own oyster test, which of course provides artificial pressure on a 
watch to know that it's waterproof. They have a machine that can open and close a Rolex 
clasp a thousand times a minute, which is kind of amazing, because you actually have to 
open. It's wild. So, you open this. It's actually kind difficult to do. Imagine doing that a 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 47 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lo

s, LLC.



thousand times a minute. They invented a machine to do that. They have a machine in 
Chêne-Bourg, which is their dial and gem-setting location, to sort through all the stones 
that they're given. First of all, Rolex only works with IF, which is internally flawless stones, 
which is obviously the most expensive, highest end. To ensure that the stones that they're 
given, whether it's diamonds or rubies or anything are real, they created a machine to sort 
them at scale and ensure that all of them are real. And I said, "Well, are bad stones or fake 
stones are real problem for you?"

They said, "No, not really. But we just want to ensure that every watch we sell is what we 
want it to be." And I was like, "How often do you get a fake diamond or a fake anything?" 
And the answer was, "One out of 10 million." To be clear, this machine was created either by 
them or they paid somebody to make it for them. This is their machine. It's not like it exists 
outside Rolex. And this gives you an idea of what they're about and how they do things. And 
it is so wonderful and so different than traditional luxury, which frankly, I may say, even as a 
purveyor of luxury items, is full of shit half the time. I'm into sneakers, but not in the way that 
I'm into other things. Why would a pair of so special edition sneakers sell for $5,000? 
Sneakers are made in China by machines. They're hand- stitched here and there. It's just 
designed. It's artificial scarcity, et cetera. When you see what goes into a, really, any high-
end mechanical watch, but in particular Rolex, you really start to understand. The 
Submariner, we'll say, is 8,000 bucks. That might be a deal after you see what goes into this 
thing. And I mentioned in the story, several competing brand presidents had told me before 
I went on this trip that, "Oh, not a human hand touches a Rolex before it's made. It's all done 
by machine." Which is effectively the most insulting thing a Swiss person can say, meaning 
that it's void of character. It's void of humanity. It's like luxury should be about people. It 
should be about craftsmanship. And they're saying, "Rolex doesn't have any of that." And I 
was like, "Oh, okay. That's kind of a bummer." That may have informed why I didn't own any 
modern Rolex at the time. You walk into Rolex HQ in Geneva and you see hundreds of 
people finishing watches. And they're not finishing in the same way Patek or Lange would, 
by hand with little pieces of wood. They're finishing maybe six or seven Rolexes at a time on 
a polishing wheel, but they're still polishing really the way that it should be done.

They're assembling dials by hand. They're assembling the bracelet by hand. There's an 
incredible amount of hand work that goes into the most basic of Rolex, being like a 
Submariner or a Datejust. Beyond that, what's so fun about them is they know exactly how 
different they are than everyone else. They also know that everyone wants to be like them. 
So, at at least two of their four facilities you might drive by and say, "Oh, there's Rolex. It's 
five stories high. It's, I don't know, a few hundred thousand square feet." When you go 
inside, you realize that it's actually 10 or 11 stories high, but five or six of those stories are 
below ground. And I just remember thinking, "Why would they do that? What's the point of 
that?" And it was in fact to suggest to anybody that drives by that Rolex is smaller than they 
actually are. And I think if we had any idea of how big the foundation was, it would blow all 
of us away. I think it's enormous. I think they're probably producing more than a million a 
year, but that's the generally accepted number. It's who they are. And if they're going to do 
something, they want to do things at the highest level. I'm a golfer and have been lucky 
enough to meet some of their players. And Adam Scott became a good friend and I asked, 
"Why don't you sponsor X, Y, and Z?" or, "Why don't you go grassroots?" Whatever. And 
they said, "This is Rolex like my golf. If we're going to do golf, we only want to be involved 
with the majors. So, the US Open, the BJ Championship, the Masters, and of course the 
British Open. And that's it." If they're going to do tennis, it's going to be Wimbledon and the 
US Open. They don't even want to mess with some of the other majors in tennis. It's just 
remarkable how committed they are to working with the very best. It's wild. It really is.

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 48 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
los us, LLC.



Rolex's Marketing and Distribution Secrets
Patrick
It's an unbelievable story. And also it's amazing to me the commitment to quality over time. And 
I'm sure there's incredible pressure for all sorts of reasons, maybe the non for profit thing is 
actually a benefit here, but there's always pressure to skimp a little bit on quality, right? Like give 
up the absolute perfect standard, because it could mean a lot more sales or a lot more scale or 
whatever. And they just haven't done it. So, you could think about buying one and looking at it 
and having it be a reminder of this commitment, all the way down to the gold. The fact that they 
own all the way down to the bare metals in the ground is crazy. As you think about their genius 
on, I guess, quality and manufacturing, what is the equivalent on the marketing and distribution 
side? So, you mentioned the great example of the woman swimming across the channel as a 
marque event that made a big splash, and they're focused on the upper echelon of whatever 
they're doing. What else do you think Rolex can teach the world's companies about unbelievable 
marketing or distribution?

Ben
Referencing slightly what I was just mentioning, that commitment to only working with the 
absolute best and forgoing opportunity, foregoing working with the next generation of, we'll 
say golfers in this case, the guys that are coming up now, until they've been validated as the 
very best, then they're just not interested. And good work if you can get it. Not everyone 
has the benefit of being able to say, "I want to work with Tiger Woods, therefore Tiger 
Woods will work with me." But I think they are just so unrelenting to their pursuit of 
excellence in the literal sense, the very best in the world, no matter what it is. It's Yo-Yo Ma. 
It's not the person that has played Carnegie hall twice. It's Yo-Yo Ma. It's Roger Federer in 
the tennis world. What's so amazing is they care about the people as much as they do the 
results. And Roger, I think, is the ultimate archetype for the Rolex. They call them Rolex 
testimonies. They don't call them ambassadors. Roger is, I wouldn't be ashamed to say, I 
think Roger's a hero to many of us. And I'm not really even a tennis player, a tennis fan. Just 
the way he-

Patrick
His character.

Ben
... floats above the air. Yeah. He floats above the air, no matter what room that he's in. He's 
just a gentleman and he married his high school sweetheart. He's just a wonder. And I've 
met him through Rolex and he is just a delightful person and completely authentic. They 
look at that. They want to be associated with people that are not only the best, but are 
genuinely good people as well. And again, good work if you can get it or it would be nice to 
only work with the best people that are also the best performers, but they really maintain 
with that. And their partnerships are different. I'm trying to think of an example. I'll say 
Leonardo DiCaprio. He's been an ambassador for TAG Heuer. He's been an ambassador, I 
think, for IWC. He is a hyper-famous, hyper-talented person. He doesn't care. That's just 
money for him, et cetera. The contracts he's had with, let's with, with TAG Heuer probably 
lasted five years. Rolex has worked with Jack Nicklaus since 1967. 1967. They work with him 
to this day. He's still very much alive and he's had a bunch of Rolexes. We did a video with 
him. But I mean, think about that deal. 1967 to 2022. That's just wild. Omega does that to a 
degree. They've had a partnership with Cindy Crawford since the early '90s, and now Kaia 
Gerber's with Omega. It's not an official ambassadorship. It's a much longer term thing, but 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 49 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colossu
, LLC.



Rolex really takes it to the next level. And they've been with Roger for his entire career.

They really are committed to long-term meaningful relationships, much more so than any 
other brand. It's not like with some of these luxury brands or car companies where, okay, 
"New CEO. I believe in tennis and equestrian." Then he gets let go and the new guy comes in 
and, "I believe in sailing and motor sports." It's not like that at all. There are core tenants of 
Rolex, motor sport is in fact one of them, then that's it. They're not playing in the NBA. 
They're not sponsoring baseball. They're not sponsoring the NFL. They're doing the things 
that they do, which is equestrian, sailing to a degree. It's motor sports, tennis, and golf. And 
it's just amazing that these strategies continue to deliver decade after decade. What was 
golf in 1967? I actually don't know the answer, but I can tell you it was probably not a big 
deal, especially back then. And the fact that they were committed back then and they're 
even more committed now is just remarkable.

Patrick
What have you learned about maybe the way that they make decisions, obviously being so long-
term oriented is one of those things, that again you think is most portable to other either luxury 
brands or just businesses in general, based on how singular they seem to be and how they make 
their choices?

Ben
It's kind of silly, but it's almost too simple, I should say. And I think it's ultimately this adage 
of, "Do the right thing." They're creating products that deliver in a way that is so far beyond, 
I think, what people understand that people would be shocked. The way that I used to 
process, I used to write for the site. I don't anymore. But as a journalist, I went to journalism 
school. I would say two types of companies, one of which is the more you learn about the 
company, the less you like them, the less you respect them. And frankly, that's a lot of luxury 
companies. You realize that, "Okay, this Swiss-made watch is actually made in China. This 
bag is actually not hand-sewn, it's sewn by machine." Little things like that. And then there 
are other companies where the more you learn about them, the more you like them. Rolex is 
the archetype of that. That article that I wrote in 2015, that was a foundational shift in my 
opinion of how watches should be made, mass luxury watches. And I think they continued 
to innovate in a way that we at Hodinkee continue to strive to be like. I mean, as an example, 
they have two in-house components that nobody knows about, or very few people know 
about. One of them is called Parachrom, which is a balance wheel, which is literally the thing 
that rotates inside the watch. There was basically, I wouldn't call it a monopoly, but pretty 
damn close to a monopoly on getting those things. And everybody from Patek to Rolex 
were using something called the Nivarox balance wheel. And Rolex said, "You know what? 
We're going to make our own at some astronomical cost, and it's going to be 10 times as 
accurate as the competitor." And they did that. And that's one of the few times they 
actually communicated on a technical innovation.

They also have their own shock absorbing system, I think it's called Paraflex, that again, 50% 
more absorbent than your traditional shock absorbent system. Would that change? Would 
that stop you or me or the guy on the street from buying a Rolex if they didn't? Not at all. 
Not at all. But they do it because they should. And they are at the core of it. What's so 
charming about them at the core of it is they are master marketers, master everything, 
master distributors, but they are watchmakers at the core of it. The Submariner, this GMP, 
this anything, I would put against any watch in the world in terms of production ability. The 
other thing I should say is that they know what they're good at and they know what they're 
not. And Rolex does not sell watches. Rolex makes watches. They own exactly, and it may 
have even closed, I should check, I'll back-check this afterwards, Rolex owns one retail store. 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 50 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssu
, LLC.



One. And Patek follows a similar model. They have, I think, four. They have London, Paris, 
Geneva, and I think Hong Kong. Rolex has one, and I actually think it may have closed, and 
it's in Switzerland. And that's simply because they had a, it was basically a family friend type 
situation that owned it, then they ended up acquiring it. So, if you go to the Rolex boutique 
in Manhattan, for example, which is in the Rolex building, that's not owned by Rolex. That's 
owned by Wempe, which is a great authorized dealer. It's actually right up the road. It's a 
German-based company. If you go to the Rolex boutique in Singapore, it's either The Hour 
Glass or another authorized dealer. So, they're not selling watches. They're selling them at 
wholesale to retailers who then make between, we'll say, 20 and 50% on every product they 
sell. And imagine your Rolex, right?

You're thinking that you've got more demand than you could possibly ever supply. And 
you're thinking, "Man, I'm giving away 20 to 50% of everything I sell. Why don't we just do 
that?" And they don't change. Because they know that first of all, everything's cyclical. The 
watch market is going through a boom unlike I've ever seen in 14 years of doing this, unlike 
the market's ever seen at all. That may or may not last. We've reached a shift where things 
will never go back to the way they were before, but things are softening up a little bit. And 
they realize, "Hey, we make watches. We don't sell them." And to have the self-control and 
the wherewithal to basically walk away from 20 to 50% of retail sales at that scale globally 
when the demand is just capacious is just so admirable. And because they know that in 100 
years, maybe things will change or maybe in 10 years, things will change. It wasn't really 
Rolex, but in 2014 or '15, around the same time that I went to go see them in Geneva, 
something called the Apple Watch came out. And Rolex is Rolex. They're going to be fine. 
But a lot of the other brands were like, "Man, is this going to eat our lunch?" And to be clear, 
it did. If you want to say apple's to apples, the Apple Watch is a bigger watch than Rolex by 
quantity and by revenue. But Rolex is obviously fine. It has changed, and this is not an Apple 
Watch segment but I'll just mention it briefly, it has changed how people buy luxury 
watches. The luxury watch pre-Apple Watch I would consider $1,000 and above. Maybe 
even $500 and above. It has decimated that market. So, the market between 500 and 
sub-5,000 has just been destroyed. The brands like Shinola and Fossil. Fossil was a multi, 
multi-billion dollar company. I mean, just enormous. Their share-

Patrick
You don't hear that name anymore. Yeah.

Ben
Exactly. Their share price in 2013, '14 pre-Apple Watch was $80 a share. But last time I 
checked, it was eight. Probably even lower than that now. They've lost 90% of their market 
cap. Apple Watch has, in some ways, helped the Rolexes and the Omega's of the world 
because Rolex and Omega and TAG Heuer, they are luxury to most people. They're clearly 
expensive. They start around 5,000 bucks instead of around one, like some of the other 
folks do. That's the baseline now. Now, you want a Rolex, Omega, TAG Heuer or above or 
nothing. You don't want the Shinola anymore. You don't want the Fossil anymore. And I think 
Apple Watch was a big, big player in that.

Patrick
Maybe say a bit, obviously we don't have the data on Rolex specifically, but just from what you 
know about the watch industry, about the income statement of a watch brand. Are they very 
high gross margin, like a lot of luxury products?

Ben

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 51 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Col ssu
, LLC.



They are.

Patrick
How are they typically distributed? Anything interesting there that you think maps back onto 
Rolex. This is Business Breakdown. It's not just product breakdowns, although here the product 
is way more interesting. Anything worth mentioning there, just in how the business itself works 
that's unique?

Ben
Rolex is more vertically integrated than most. Once you absorb the cost of acquiring and 
bring everything in-house, you would assume that the margin would be a little bit higher 
because they're making everything themselves. Historically and generally speaking, there 
are very few brands that are as vertically integrated as Rolex. Weirdly, Seiko would be one 
brand. Seiko would be one. Patek would be another. But most brands are buying effectively 
everything. The component, the movement might be an in-house design. I'm using air 
quotes here. In-house design, but they're buying EBOS base calibers and modifying them 
significantly. There's margin there. They have to buy the products, to this day, or at least 
back in 2015, Rolex actually did not manufacture their own hands. I don't know why, but 
they were buying that from a company, I forgot the name of it. I think Fiedler SA. So Rolex 
was buying crystals in hands, but nothing else. Most brands are buying pretty much 
everything and then they're assembling it and putting it together. So then it just becomes 
like, okay, the production costs watch is the raw materials. It's the man hours. It's the straps. 
It's all that stuff. And then they would ship it out to a U.S. distributor at generally, probably 
about, I would say, 40% of what you'll see in the stores. So 40% of U.S. retail. And then the 
distributor would take 20% and then the retailer would take about 40% of that. So you can 
assume that your retailer is buying stuff at about 40% below what you're paying. And then 
the distributor is taking 20% of that. And then the actual producer of the watch is probably 
making 200% on that.

What Rolex Can Teach Us About Business
Patrick
If you think about Rolex specifically, great watchmakers, in general, what do you think are the 
most important overall business lessons where you've seen how, let's say, Rolex specifically 
works at a base level. You've walked the factory floors. You're intimately familiar with the 
products. And then when you start thinking about other product categories, whatever, it doesn't 
need to just be luxury goods, what do you wish more businesses did or a certain way that they 
conducted themselves most based on what you've learned about Rolex?

Ben
I think continuity of design is paramount. That is probably really a simple thought. If you look 
at the Submariner I have on my desk, I have a 1954 Submariner and it looks pretty much like 
this. I have one from 1965 that looks just like this. And the idea that you can create a 
consumer good, and in fact, a completely superfluous kind of unnecessary consumer good, 
that becomes iconic, is everything. And if you look at its competitors, look at Omega, the 
Speedmaster, the washer went the moon, that is by far its most iconic product. And 
because they're making the Speedmaster just like they did in the 1960s, that is why it 
continues to have the following that it does. Look at cars. Porsche 911. 911s are trading well 
above retail right now for a variety of reasons. Wasn't always the case, but now they are. 
And you look at the Hermès Birkin bag. And it's just sticking with luxury. That bag has been 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 52 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
lo

sus, LLC.



around for 40 years and it will always be the iconic women's high end bag. So continuity of 
design, and we just did a podcast on this on Hodinkee, I think really is what creates multi-
generational demand. And I think with watches in particular, my origin story is I was given an 
Omega Speedmaster by my maternal grandfather, who was my hero, and that watch 
continues in some form or another to be made today. And so when my daughter who's on 
the other side of this wall, who's six months old, again is 25 or something I can say, "Hey, 
Georgie." That's her name. "Let's go out and get a watch that looks just like Dad's, that'll look 
just like your great-grandfather's, who you never met." And there's something really 
wonderful about that. Because, again, these are multi-generational items. Thinking long 
term, which is what Rolex does... Rolex is planning. I can guarantee they have their product 
mix figured out for 2035, guaranteed. Being able to not have to answer to shareholders, like 
so many of us do, and play for the long ball, I think is intoxicating for somebody like me. For 
example, in 2013, it was the 50th anniversary of the Daytona. At that point, the watch was a 
steel watch with a steel bezel.

All people wanted was a black bezel. That's it. That was all we were looking for. It wasn't too 
much to ask for. They didn't give it to us. They waited another two years. They gave us a 
platinum Daytona with a color bezel. It was kind of brown, ceramic bezel. And I just said, 
"Man, that's kind of shitty. 50th anniversary, they're not going to give us the thing that we 
want?" And it's just a black bezel. It doesn't seem like much. And then when the watch came 
out in 2015, we all said, "Great," and we're celebrating it, and that kind of set off a 
pandemonium. But they do these iterative things where like that black bezel now exists on 
the gold version of the Daytona, but not on a bracelet. And so if you want to buy a black 
bezel on a gold Daytona, it comes on a rubber strap. And I guarantee you next year, the year 
after that, we're going to get it on the bracelet. This idea of iterating to a degree that is so 
frustrating almost for the consumer, but it makes you so excited. And by the way, I want the 
gold Daytona on the bracelet with the black bezel. But because it didn't come out on the 
bracelet, I bought it on the rubber strap, even though it's not even really what I wanted. 
When it comes down the bracelet, I'm going to buy that, too. And the idea that they've 
created demand for product that people will buy several iterations of basically... This is not 
basically, really the same thing, is just super admirable. That somebody that creates 
products, which is what we do sometimes at Hodinkee, to do things in that level of detail 
and continue to foster the demand that far out base of supply is just remarkable. But again, 
doing things in a way that is not shouting from rooftops, but the quality is there, and for 
people like me who know a lot about this product in particular, I can look you or anybody in 
the eye and say, "Yeah, if you can afford this watch, it's a great fucking product."

Patrick
What other brands in your world would you encourage people to study in this kind of detail to 
learn interesting lessons?

Ben
The other brand that I've mentioned a lot in this episode here is Omega. And I think Omega 
now is doing... They've learned a lot from Rolex, if I can say, and nobody's told me that, but I 
can just see it. The Omega Speedmaster, which went to the moon organically, it's not like 
they paid NASA for that, that is the greatest achievement of humankind. We sent men to 
the moon. It's insane. And there was a Rolex, to be clear, in contention for that, and NASA 
chose the Speedmaster over it. And that's just the facts. And so the Speedmaster was not, 
believe it or not, the commercial stalwart that it is for Omega now. Up until probably five 
years ago, it was the Seamaster. It was a dive watch. And Omega is actually a larger brand in 
China than Rolex is, believe it or not. They were driven by Chinese consumers. It was a lot of 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 53 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
loss

, LLC.



different colors and kind of interesting things. Then all of a sudden, the current president, a 
guy named Raynald Aeschlimann came in and said, "You know what? The Speedmaster is 
iconic. The Speedmaster went to the god damned moon. This should be the thing that 
people go crazy for. And this should be the product that can compete with Rolex. And they 
started doing these special editions, these limited editions, one of which was to celebrate 
15 years of Hodinkee. They did them with some other folks here and there. They did one 
with the Porsche Club of America. They did some special things with Snoopy, which is a tile 
of NASA. And then they stopped. They stopped. So no more limited editions, really. They do 
different editions, but not limited.

And now all of a sudden, the Speedmaster trades above retail. The Speedmaster is what 
everybody wants. And we're an authorized dealer from Omega and we can't keep them in 
stock. And so you look at the Omega Speedmaster, which, 10 years ago, was really kind of a 
secondary product. And now it's a primary product for the second biggest brand of the 
world, who sponsors the Olympics and James Bond and all these iconic things, and they're 
really paying attention to the enthusiast, which Hodinkee represents, which is who I 
represent, and the mass market folks, which is just the guy that wants a nice thing. I think 
Rolex has frustrated a lot of people, and this is no news to them. I know they know because 
you can no longer go in and buy the watch you want at all. And historically, the Daytona was 
always kind of difficult to get, but as a 25 year old guy that used to work in finance, which is 
when I started at Hodinkee, you make your first $5,000 bonus or whatever, and you go into 
the store and you buy your Submariner and like, "Okay, I'm an adult now. I have a 
Submariner." That doesn't exist anymore. And I think that's a real bummer for a lot of folks. 
And that certainly has made the aftermarket price of these things going in a significant way, 
but it really turns a lot of people off and Omega, TAG Heuer, Panerai, a lot of brands who 
really said, "You know what? If you can't get that Submariner, we'd be happy to sell you a 
watch. And by the way, here's some champagne and we're going to invite you to our next 
party and you might enjoy it."

Look, Rolex is an exceptional brand. I would never say they're not. I spent the last hour 
telling you why they're exceptional, but these are just watches. I think we have to remember 
that. I'm the first person to say that nobody needs a watch. So no doctor is prescribing us to 
buy watches. We're not curing cancer here. And so if somebody has worked so hard that 
they can afford a $10,000 Rolex and Rolex says, "Sorry, you can't have one," that's a really 
frustrating experience. And X percent of you says, "Well, maybe I just want you more now," 
but Y percent of you kind of says, "Well, you know what? Screw you, man. I'm going to go 
buy an Omega. I'm going to go buy a Panerai. And I'm going to love them and they're going 
to love me." It's just a matter of how much kind of ego there is involved there. Some people 
don't care at all. But I can tell you without question that several people that I know 
personally have been turned off, not only from Rolex, Patek, and Richard Mille and AP, 
because these are phenomenally expensive things. Rolex is on the low end side there. Let's 
talk about AP, which the watch you want is probably $30,000. Now, what you might want is 
$150,000, but to walk into a store and say, "Hey, my name's Ben. I've got $150,000 ready to 
go. I want to buy this thing," and be told, "Sorry. No. Who are you? Can I see your Instagram 
feed? What do you do for a living? Who do you know?"

How insulting must that be. And the answer is really fucking insulting to a lot of people. And 
a lot of people say, You know what? Fuck you. I'm just going to go buy it for $500 on a pre-
owned site, or I'm just going to not buy it at all. I'm going to take a nice vacation or buy a 
Ferrari instead." And I think this industry has really struggled with that. The market has been 
so buoyed by easy access to capital, I'll say, and the prices have just continued to go up and 
go up in a way... It's not normal. And it's not just true for watches. It's true for cars, wine, art, 
et cetera. And all of a sudden, when things tightened up a little bit this year, which they 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 54 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colos
s, LLC.



have people said, "Oh, wait a minute. Rolexes will not always go up value? Then I'm out. I'm 
just going to sell it." That's a shame. And I think, not just Rolex, but all luxury brands who 
have their chest puffed out really broadly now should just remember that everything is 
cyclical, and that if you have somebody that wants to buy a product from you that nobody 
needs, you should give them as much respect as possible because it doesn't last forever.

Patrick
We've talked a lot about the wonderful aspects of Rolex and some of these brands in general. 
What are maybe some negative lessons, things that you've seen them do through history, not 
just Rolex, but other brands like it, do you think are good, valuable lessons of what not to do? 
You've mentioned one there, which is what sparks my question.

Ben
The weakest link of any chain is always retail. Finding people, good sales people, is 
remarkably hard because you're selling stuff. And a lot of the folks that are able to afford 
this stuff, frankly, are incredibly intelligent, incredibly well versed in the world, know 
everything, know everyone. If they don't, they're going to go on Hodinkee and read all about 
it so they do know everything. And you get salespeople that aren't used to that. And I think 
you have people that are selling product in a way that is so counter to what these things 
represent. Just using what I have on my desk as an example. I bought this GMT with a good 
friend of mine. He had just signed a deal to play in a band, a very famous band. And I had 
just signed my seed ground in fundraising for Hodinkee, which was a huge deal for me. And 
we went into the Rolex store on Fifth Avenue. We bought the exact same watch together. 
So this watch has nothing to do with how much it costs or anything. It has everything to do 
with that success in my life, that success in my friend's life. And to be told, "No," in that 
moment, imagine we were there together trying to celebrate these achievements for both 
of us. And we were like, "Sorry, you can't have anything." And at that point, there were two 
of the exact same watch sitting in the case so it was easy. But right now, if we were to do it 
again, we'd probably get told, "No." It's so, so demoralizing and insulting. I hesitate to use 
the word enemy, but you could create an enemy for life as a consumer. That is crazy.

Rolex knows it's a problem and they are doing everything they can to meet it. And I believe 
them when they tell me that they're creating more watches than ever before so that 
demand paces it. But there needs to be a better way. And frankly, I don't know what that 
way is. Maybe it's eCommerce. I'm a believer in that. I don't know. Maybe it's actual waiting 
lists, where people can actually put their name down and say, "Okay, this person's at number 
1,123." When you get to that thing, you'll get the watch. That doesn't exist. And the idea that 
the waiting lists are even referenced by Rolex today is nonsense. There's no such thing. If 
you know somebody at Rolex, you'll get the watch. If you bought a bunch of watches that 
they can't sell, then you'll get the one that they can sell. It's a gift basically. And again, I want 
to be clear. Rolex is not alone. Several brands that are very hot right now are doing the same 
thing. But man, both my parents were teachers. The fact that I have more than one Rolex is 
still shocking. I'm just happy to be here. And so I'd think of, if I wasn't me in the watch world, 
but I had made a few thousand bucks and I wanted to buy one of these things, how 
disappointed you would be, how angry you would be that you just worked your off for the 
last 40 years to get to a point where you can afford this thing and you're told "No"? I think 
that is a major problem. And I think that is going to continue to be a problem for a long time 
unless somebody changes.

Patrick
It's a really interesting balance of wanting it to be something aspirational, but once you achieve 

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 55 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

C
l ssu

, LLC.



a certain bar, to be able to do it. It's a fine line that you have to walk as a luxury brand. Really, 
really interesting.

Ben
Look, it's integrity and its honesty. If somebody came to me and they knocked in mind door 
and said, "Hey, we want to buy your house." I'd probably say, "Well, I really appreciate that, 
but we're not looking to sell it. But in five years when my daughter's grown and we need a 
bigger house, I'll give you a call." I would call that person. And I think that person would 
respect me for saying, "Not right now, but I'll give you a shout when we're ready." What 
goes on now is not at all that. It's basically they say, "Hey, sir, please give me your name and 
we'll reach out if and when we have a product available," which doesn't mean a thing. It 
doesn't mean a thing. If you're a celebrity, if you're an entrepreneur, if you're somebody that 
has a million Instagram followers, they're going to call you soon, and if you're not, you're not 
going to get a call at all. And I think that is when things get really dicey, when people that 
don't have purchase history is kind of the new street credit in the watch world. Here's 
another kind of interesting situation where a lot of brands are closing down authorized 
dealers. So they're closing stores. So let's say you, Patrick, were the number one Audemars 
Piguet client at some dealer in Ohio or something.

And you had bought a million dollars worth of APs from this authorized dealer in Ohio for 
over the past 10 years. And then that dealer got closed. And then you walked into the AP 
boutique on Seventh Street and said, "Hey, my name is Patrick. Look, I've spent a million 
bucks with this dealer that no longer exists. Can I have the new ceramic Tourbillon," or 
whatever. "We're so pleased for you to come in, blah, blah. We'd love to chat. But you don't 
have a purchase history here so we're going to have to put you to the bottom of the list." 
How would you feel about that? Imagine you've been buying that product in the correct me 
from an authorized dealer for a decade and you just got told you had to start all over again. 
And that is what's happening in the watch world right now. And I'm not singling out AP or 
anybody, but it's the arrogance of some of these brands that are very hot to think that they 
can continue to treat people that way even though everything is cyclical. And I've seen all 
these brands trade below retail, just like we're seeing them trade above retail right now.

Patrick
I'll certainly remember this conversation for this idea of companies that, as you get to know 
them, you like them more, which is probably quite a rare feature of any company. Typically, the 
thing you see on the front of it is the best version of the thing almost by definition. They're 
going to surface the most attractive, interesting stories, elements, whatever, but this idea that 
I'll think of those five floors below ground is a great lesson. Ben, this has been so much fun. 
What an interesting brand. I can't think of anything like it that's a nonprofit, that's had this 
endurance, that has this global recognition and style. Thank you so much for taking the time 
today to break it down with us.

Ben
It's my pleasure. It's been a lot of fun.

Business Breakdowns - Rolex: Timeless Excellence
Page 56 of 56. © Copyright Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.

Colo
s

s, LLC.


# Transcript 3

00:00:00.120 the book I'm going to talk to you about
00:00:01.120 today is nearly impossible to find it
00:00:03.120 was first published in 1946 there's only
00:00:05.040 a thousand copies ever made it's called
00:00:07.439 Rolex Jubilee and then the subtitle is
00:00:10.599 actually in Latin but when you translate
00:00:12.200 it from Latin into English it literally
00:00:14.120 means go with me and so it's a tiny four
00:00:17.880 volume like history of Rolex and volume
00:00:20.880 one was written by Hans wilsdorf who is
00:00:23.880 the founder of Rolex and so he tells the
00:00:26.880 founding story of Rolex in his own words
00:00:29.000 there's a lot of things that Al surpris
00:00:30.279 you in this story the first one being
00:00:31.759 that he was a sole shareholder of Rolex
00:00:34.520 but the second one was that he was an
00:00:35.840 orphan so he goes right into his early
00:00:37.680 life and in one sentence he sets the
00:00:39.719 entire stage for us he says I was born
00:00:41.200 on March 22nd 1881 my mother's early
00:00:45.000 death was soon followed by that of my
00:00:47.719 father's and at age 12 I was an orphan
00:00:50.800 and there's a decision made by his
00:00:52.199 uncles that is going to change the
00:00:53.520 trajectory of hans's entire life they
00:00:56.520 decide to sell the family business to
00:00:58.559 pay for boarding school for the kidss
00:01:00.800 that are left behind so he says my
00:01:01.960 mother's Brothers decided that'd be
00:01:03.800 wiser to liquidate the prosperous
00:01:05.640 business which had belong first to my
00:01:07.040 grandfather and then later to my father
00:01:08.880 believing that in this way we children
00:01:11.080 could be better prepared for life
00:01:12.400 without having to call upon anyone for
00:01:14.040 help his life would have been very
00:01:15.560 different without his uncles and that
00:01:16.840 decision to actually liquidate the
00:01:18.119 business and then take that money and
00:01:19.400 actually send him to boarding school
00:01:20.439 which I'll get into why that's so
00:01:21.520 important for the founding Rolex in one
00:01:23.280 second but he talks a little bit about
00:01:25.200 the fact that one of the best things his
00:01:26.520 uncles ever did for him and his siblings
00:01:28.600 was that they taught him self-reliant
00:01:30.759 keep in mind the words I'm reading you
00:01:32.560 Hans is writing them he is in his mid
00:01:34.759 60s he's looking back at his life and so
00:01:37.439 he says there uncles were not
00:01:38.840 indifferent to Our Fate they made me
00:01:40.880 become self-reliant very early in life
00:01:43.960 looking back I believe that it is to
00:01:46.799 this that much of My Success is due now
00:01:50.680 this part is really important there's
00:01:52.000 going to be a few times where I'm going
00:01:52.960 to talk to you today about things that
00:01:54.520 happen early in Han's life he doesn't
00:01:56.360 understand so you and I talk about this
00:01:57.880 over and over again the the idea that
00:01:59.399 the world is a classroom like the the
00:02:01.640 the books that you're reading the
00:02:03.000 Knowledge and Skills that you're
00:02:04.200 acquiring the relationships You're
00:02:05.960 Building you have no idea that the
00:02:08.479 opportunities that they unlock in the
00:02:09.840 future you just can't possibly predict
00:02:11.520 it and so they're going to put him in a
00:02:13.319 boarding school so I'm going to read
00:02:14.239 this to you and I'm going to say why
00:02:15.599 this is so important to the founding of
00:02:17.720 Rolex highly likely that if he didn't
00:02:19.879 learn all these languages at this
00:02:21.519 boarding school that there wouldn't have
00:02:23.000 been a Rolex or his his career
00:02:24.360 definitely would have been vastly
00:02:25.440 different I'll to explain why in one
00:02:26.760 second so says we're plac in a boarding
00:02:28.280 school of excellent repute where we
00:02:30.480 received that sound education so
00:02:32.560 necessary to the man who has to make his
00:02:34.400 own way in the world I showed a
00:02:36.239 particular liking for mathematics and
00:02:38.040 languages the languages is so important
00:02:40.280 and this inclination drove me to travel
00:02:42.519 and work in foreign countries so this
00:02:44.920 education in multiple languages I would
00:02:46.879 argue is maybe the basis for his entire
00:02:49.400 career it will lead directly to his
00:02:51.840 discovery of the opportunity on which
00:02:53.239 his life and career will then be devoted
00:02:55.120 to and it happens relatively early in
00:02:57.519 his life because at the age of 19 he
00:03:00.440 Hans is going to start working in the
00:03:01.840 watch industry at 19 and he will do so
00:03:04.239 for the next 60 years until his death
00:03:06.720 now when I say it's the watch industry
00:03:08.200 this is the thing that blew my mind
00:03:09.720 because everybody knows the brand Rolex
00:03:11.959 without a doubt one of the most valuable
00:03:13.239 brand names in existence right but there
00:03:15.799 was no such thing as a wristwatch
00:03:17.560 industry for men at the time that Hans
00:03:19.599 is when he's 19 years old this is the
00:03:22.200 most one of the most shocking things
00:03:23.319 about me doing doing all this reading
00:03:24.959 and research it's one I've been
00:03:25.879 repeating all week to to friends that
00:03:27.599 I've been telling about Hans and I
00:03:29.799 believe it's to be one of the most
00:03:31.000 inspiring parts of this entire story and
00:03:32.599 I I'll go into that but so at 19 years
00:03:34.599 old right he goes to this little city in
00:03:37.360 Switzerland to get he has a job he's
00:03:39.720 going to work as an English
00:03:41.640 correspondence and a clerk with a Swiss
00:03:44.680 company called kuna Corton Now watch how
00:03:47.640 this all ties together so kuna Corton
00:03:49.640 it's a Swiss company all they do is they
00:03:51.680 export Swiss pocket watches the watch
00:03:55.920 industry like 99 maybe more than 99% of
00:03:58.920 the watch industry at this time in
00:04:00.159 history is pocket watches and so this
00:04:03.200 company they act as import agents this
00:04:04.920 is really important because he spoke
00:04:06.959 because at this point Hans speaks
00:04:08.560 English German French I think there's a
00:04:10.799 there's a few other languages that he
00:04:13.040 actually speaks he gets a job where he
00:04:15.000 handles the business correspondence of
00:04:16.959 this relatively large import agent for
00:04:19.918 Swiss watch manufacturers this business
00:04:23.040 is operating in a ton of different
00:04:24.560 countries and a ton of different
00:04:26.320 languages so this helps him get a really
00:04:28.800 good understanding of international
00:04:30.759 strategic marketing and I'm not sure
00:04:32.600 there's a better form of education for a
00:04:34.320 young person learning business like when
00:04:36.080 I was reading this section it reminded
00:04:37.960 me exactly of what like a young
00:04:39.520 Rockefeller so Hans is 19 where we are
00:04:41.400 in the story Rockefeller gets a job when
00:04:43.280 he's like 16 or 17 for this produce
00:04:45.120 commission firm in Cleveland that's
00:04:46.880 called huet and Tuttle and as a result
00:04:48.960 of that job Rockefeller learns so many
00:04:51.840 valuable skills he understands
00:04:54.160 bookkeeping he understands contracts
00:04:55.840 he's looking at shipping he's learning
00:04:57.560 about margins he's learning skills he's
00:04:59.880 going to use for his entire career once
00:05:01.400 he starts building his own company and
00:05:02.960 when you're in a position like
00:05:03.800 Rockefeller was in Ohio or like Hans is
00:05:06.400 is in Switzerland like you can learn so
00:05:07.800 fast so in the case of Hans like he's
00:05:09.440 going to start working here at 19 by 25
00:05:11.320 he starts his own company that that's
00:05:12.600 the company that's going to turn into
00:05:14.039 Rolex and so Hans describes the time of
00:05:16.320 his life he says it was a big concern
00:05:19.000 exporting about 1 million Franks worth
00:05:20.840 of watches annually all grades of
00:05:22.479 watches were dealt with although only a
00:05:23.960 small proportion was manufactured by The
00:05:26.280 Firm itself so I need to translate that
00:05:28.360 for you in the late 1800s early 1900s
00:05:31.440 when you hear the word concern we would
00:05:32.919 call that a company today they would
00:05:34.520 call what we would call a product they
00:05:35.960 would call an article so this import
00:05:38.479 agents business for Swiss watch
00:05:40.639 manufacturers was a pretty big business
00:05:42.840 is what he's saying and the next
00:05:44.280 sentence is why I said that decision
00:05:46.160 made by his uncles to educate him to
00:05:47.840 send him to the to the best school that
00:05:49.319 school teaches in multiple languages why
00:05:51.680 the the opportunity to found and develop
00:05:54.280 Rolex was unlocked many years in the
00:05:56.560 future and he says my work there
00:05:57.800 provided an excellent opportunity to
00:05:59.160 study the watch watchmaking industry
00:06:00.440 closely and to examine every type of
00:06:02.560 watch produced both in Switzerland and
00:06:04.880 abroad so a few years later he's going
00:06:07.039 to switch to another firm and move to
00:06:09.080 London and this is what he said about
00:06:10.400 this time and he's only going to last
00:06:11.479 two years before he starts his own
00:06:12.680 company two things struck me most
00:06:14.880 forcibly that's an interesting writing
00:06:16.400 most forcibly about my new employers on
00:06:18.479 one hand their commercial competence and
00:06:20.800 on the other hand their lack of
00:06:22.520 specialization and now looking back
00:06:24.479 after having done all this other
00:06:25.560 additional reading and research that
00:06:27.039 sentence is really important to me
00:06:28.680 because he's talking about like you know
00:06:30.000 they're very commercially competent
00:06:31.680 right in other words they have their
00:06:32.639  together they're running a great
00:06:34.039 business Hans will do the same but then
00:06:36.160 he says their lack of specialization so
00:06:37.720 this is something I've been talking
00:06:38.599 about non-stop this week that is frankly
00:06:40.639 very inspiring to me and you see it over
00:06:42.039 and over again in the stories I think
00:06:43.080 that's why reading business biographies
00:06:44.639 is far superior than reading just
00:06:45.840 business books because in every single
00:06:48.520 life of an entrepreneur you like grope
00:06:50.840 your way to what you're doing there's
00:06:52.800 all these like false starts dead ends
00:06:55.639 you can just see as you go through not
00:06:57.560 only H's life but everybody's life it's
00:06:59.000 just like they're trying they figure it
00:07:00.440 out a little bit along the way and they
00:07:02.560 also ape and copy right people that
00:07:05.720 became before them experiences they had
00:07:07.000 before them so when he starts out this
00:07:08.400 is the the one of the most aspiring
00:07:10.280 things because like Rolex is so
00:07:12.120 unbelievably focused today they know
00:07:14.520 what they're great at and they focus
00:07:15.879 relentlessly on her but in the very
00:07:17.400 beginning Hans had no idea and what I
00:07:19.639 mean by that is he had you know I don't
00:07:21.120 know 15 different brand names he wasn't
00:07:23.919 making watches at all he was just
00:07:25.639 reselling them he was really A Gifted
00:07:27.840 marketer which I'll get to in a minute
00:07:29.520 when you think about lack of
00:07:30.319 specialization is this like their focus
00:07:32.160 on luxury Royal Le's F focus on luxury
00:07:35.319 watches he was selling cheap watches you
00:07:37.759 know mid-grade watches really expensive
00:07:39.759 watches he is constantly experimenting
00:07:42.280 using that action as a form of Education
00:07:44.720 right it gives him information back and
00:07:45.960 then you see him adjust slowly over time
00:07:48.639 and it is through that process that he
00:07:50.199 uncovers or discovers this phenomenal
00:07:53.319 opportunity and this is when he
00:07:55.039 describes founding the company that's
00:07:56.560 going to turn into Rolex I soon gain
00:07:58.440 confidence in my s and in 1905 at the
00:08:01.199 age of 24 I decided to set up in
00:08:02.879 business feeling that my training and
00:08:04.560 education had prepared me to stand on my
00:08:06.759 own and so he starts this company called
00:08:09.560 wisdorf and Davis and he says they had
00:08:12.039 we had modest Capital at our disposal so
00:08:15.039 will this is fascinating too about again
00:08:17.720 this this constant iteration that you
00:08:19.520 see throughout the life of Hans wilsdorf
00:08:21.400 so wilsdorf and Davis was they were not
00:08:23.400 watch manufacturers they purchased
00:08:25.039 watches from Swiss manufacturers think
00:08:27.199 about his experience that he had he
00:08:28.319 worked for two firms that did this I
00:08:29.919 like oh I can do this too right let me
00:08:31.440 draw another analogy to Rockefeller did
00:08:33.519 Rockefeller jump from hulet and Tuttle
00:08:35.479 this produce commission house into
00:08:36.958 Standard Oil no what did he do he quit
00:08:38.919 and started his own produce commission
00:08:41.000 house and then that opportunity led him
00:08:43.320 to this accidental discovery of
00:08:44.640 realizing hey I can actually become one
00:08:45.959 of the first oil refiners so again this
00:08:48.959 is fascinating so wisdorf and Davis
00:08:51.040 they're not watch manufacturers they
00:08:52.600 purchase watch watches from the Swiss
00:08:55.279 Watch makers right from Swiss I keep
00:08:57.600 saying swish I don't know why I'm adding
00:08:59.360 it an H on there from Swiss
00:09:01.640 manufacturers and then would sell them
00:09:03.640 to retailers but I love this idea where
00:09:05.600 he starts out he's just got an office
00:09:06.800 he's got no money so what are you going
00:09:07.920 to do like you can't make them yourself
00:09:09.360 you just got to sell them when they're
00:09:10.399 talking about they're importing watches
00:09:11.720 they're talking about pocket watches if
00:09:14.040 you only remember one thing from this
00:09:15.560 episode the only one thing is it's like
00:09:17.079 the power of belief the reason Rolex is
00:09:20.120 what it is today the reason that we're
00:09:21.440 talking about Hans you know what 80
00:09:23.240 years after he died something like that
00:09:25.079 it's because his belief this belief in
00:09:27.680 the wristwatch for men which did did not
00:09:29.959 exist when he started believing in it
00:09:32.320 Hans is a huge collector of pocket
00:09:34.000 watches which I think is also important
00:09:35.279 he's working in the industry he collects
00:09:36.600 pocket watches when you collect
00:09:38.160 something when you see something you see
00:09:39.440 its flaws and you see what should be
00:09:40.839 improved you see that with the way Hans
00:09:43.160 was thinking about developing a new
00:09:45.160 market for wristwatches because he saw
00:09:47.480 the the deficiency of the pocket watch
00:09:50.279 industry because he was he so intimately
00:09:51.959 involved in it and so he's describing
00:09:54.240 what the state of this industry was when
00:09:56.040 he was 24 years old when he started his
00:09:57.720 first company he says at this period the
00:09:59.600 wristlet watch so this is hilarious they
00:10:01.920 do not call them wrist watches right
00:10:03.560 they called them either wristlet watches
00:10:05.800 they would also call them bracelet
00:10:07.959 watches and the reason they call them
00:10:09.720 bracelet watch is because at this time
00:10:11.720 only women would wear wrist watches and
00:10:15.160 so he talks about this the fact was for
00:10:17.279 men the wrist watch or the bracelet
00:10:19.240 watch was an object of
00:10:21.120 derision the idea of wearing a watch on
00:10:23.640 one's wrist was at this time thought
00:10:25.959 contrary to the conception of
00:10:27.600 masculinity
00:10:29.440 one guy remarked that he wouldn't be
00:10:30.920 caught doing such an unrefined thing
00:10:32.959 meaning wearing a watch on his wrist he
00:10:35.040 said you'd be likely to catch him in a
00:10:37.440 dress as you would to be wearing a
00:10:39.880 wristlet and this sentence says
00:10:41.880 everything prior to World War I wrist
00:10:44.680 watches for men did not exist that blew
00:10:46.680 my mind prior to World War I wrist
00:10:48.560 watches for men didn't exist and the
00:10:50.480 reason that people that men in World War
00:10:52.279 I in uh War uh wrist watches they were
00:10:55.079 known as trench watches and they did
00:10:57.000 that so they could coordinate movement
00:10:58.360 on the battlefield that is the very
00:11:00.360 beginning of the wristwatch industry for
00:11:03.519 men and so Hans talks about the fact
00:11:05.839 that hey you know of course if the
00:11:06.959 public is skeptical then of course the
00:11:08.720 existing players in the industry are
00:11:10.360 going to be skeptical I think this is
00:11:11.440 why it's so important that he was
00:11:13.040 somebody young usually people younger
00:11:14.959 coming into Industries they they see all
00:11:16.800 the things that all the flaws that they
00:11:18.399 could fix he says watchmakers all over
00:11:19.800 the world remain skeptical as to its
00:11:21.880 possibilities meaning the riskwatch for
00:11:23.160 men and believe that this new fangled
00:11:25.040 object was bound to prove a failure
00:11:26.880 their argument against the wrist watch
00:11:29.320 were the following and they're
00:11:30.880 legitimate arguments these are
00:11:32.040 essentially the way I you would think
00:11:33.880 about what he's describing here it's
00:11:35.200 something you and I have talked about
00:11:35.959 over and over again that problems are
00:11:36.920 just opportunities and work close
00:11:38.399 business is problems so the best
00:11:40.000 companies are just effective problem
00:11:41.480 solving machines and so they're like no
00:11:43.079 you have all these unsolved problems
00:11:44.760 first the mechanism required by this
00:11:46.440 type of watch must of necessity be small
00:11:49.000 and delicate and could therefore never
00:11:51.040 withstand the violent gestures of the
00:11:53.040 hand and arm second dust and water would
00:11:56.760 rapidly spoil the mechanism he's going
00:11:58.560 to solve that problem too third accuracy
00:12:01.240 and regularity of working could never be
00:12:03.320 attained with such small so small of a
00:12:05.720 movement that's the third problem that
00:12:07.000 he is going to solve back to Hans in
00:12:09.800 spite of all of this I kept my faith in
00:12:13.079 the wristlet watch and was determined to
00:12:15.440 see what could be done now this is the
00:12:17.279 crazy thing so he's writing that as a
00:12:18.800 65-year old man I found a quote when he
00:12:22.639 is 33 in 1914 this guy really believed
00:12:26.480 in this he says my personal opinion is
00:12:28.440 that the pocket watches will almost
00:12:30.240 completely disappear and that wrist
00:12:32.320 watches will replace them definitively I
00:12:35.199 am not mistaken in this opinion and you
00:12:37.600 will see that I am right that is insane
00:12:40.920 He's 33 years old when he's saying that
00:12:42.639 so he says the task I undertook meant
00:12:44.120 the overcoming of enormous difficulties
00:12:45.880 he just laid out all the problems that
00:12:47.760 were preventing other people from doing
00:12:49.199 this and yet today after 40 Years of
00:12:51.399 striving it seems to me that I have
00:12:53.560 surmounted them and I believe that in
00:12:55.760 doing so I've have contributed to the
00:12:57.120 development of the watch watchmaking
00:12:58.800 industry in general and then it gets
00:13:00.959 even more fascinating because then you
00:13:02.720 could tell he he he's thinking like an
00:13:04.160 entrepreneur you know he wanted to build
00:13:05.839 wealth as you can imagine an orphan
00:13:07.720 wanting to do so right and so
00:13:09.639 essentially he he identifies like well
00:13:11.600 this pocket watch the pocket watch
00:13:13.959 industry is never going to grow because
00:13:16.800 how are we using it po at the time
00:13:18.519 pocket watches were passed down from
00:13:21.399 father to son then from son to grandson
00:13:24.639 and they're also hidden in your pocket
00:13:26.320 and Hans is looking at this is like this
00:13:28.120 is a big problem and so what he realizes
00:13:30.240 like if he could take it out of the
00:13:32.079 pocket and put it on your wrist right
00:13:33.720 there's going to be more wear and tear
00:13:34.920 but you're also going to see it so he
00:13:35.920 says the wristwatch was bound to bring
00:13:37.920 about a certain revolution in the
00:13:39.440 industry it would have to cause an
00:13:41.360 increase in sales not only on account of
00:13:43.279 its novelty but also because by its very
00:13:46.000 nature it called for more frequent
00:13:48.720 renewal more exposure to damage than the
00:13:51.839 pocket watch that is actually really
00:13:54.199 shrewd observation was just like well
00:13:56.040 you're going to buy one pocket watch and
00:13:57.480 it's going to last for 100 years
00:13:59.600 no one sees it it's protected of course
00:14:02.079 this this industry is going to be so
00:14:03.519 much smaller than the wristwatch
00:14:05.160 industry could be if we can just
00:14:06.600 convince men to wear these damn wrist
00:14:09.519 watches and then he also had like this
00:14:11.680 shrewd insight to human uh nature and
00:14:13.800 human psychology because you know it's
00:14:15.279 hidden in your you don't see the product
00:14:17.040 being used but now if I break take that
00:14:19.399 product that that was hidden in your
00:14:20.880 coat and I put it on your Watch What
00:14:22.360 Happens becomes a fashion accessory and
00:14:25.000 so people see it it helps the product
00:14:27.480 spread and so he says the wrist watch is
00:14:29.440 the type of product of which each
00:14:31.360 individual likes to have not only one
00:14:33.560 but several and then this may be the
00:14:36.240 most important sentence I read from Hans
00:14:39.800 or about Hans because this is just
00:14:42.079 incredible sentence because Hans had the
00:14:45.079 highest order bit that other people in
00:14:47.519 the watch industry didn't and that was
00:14:50.079 belief and this is what he said I had
00:14:52.360 very early realize the manifold
00:14:54.000 possibilities of the wristwatch and
00:14:55.600 feeling sure that they would materialize
00:14:58.240 in time I resolutely went on my way
00:15:01.880 Rolex was thus able to get several years
00:15:05.079 ahead of other watch manufacturers who
00:15:07.920 persisted in clinging to the pocket
00:15:10.759 watch as their Chief
00:15:13.240 product this is something that cannot be
00:15:15.680 skipped over so Steve Jobs had this idea
00:15:18.399 and I heard him say it right before he
00:15:20.120 died this is like two years before he
00:15:21.360 died he was giving this interview think
00:15:22.920 he was on stage with Bill Gates if I
00:15:24.199 remember correctly but he talked about
00:15:26.160 the highest order bit and so I actually
00:15:28.480 had a look that up what did that mean
00:15:30.240 when I heard Steve said it and he's he's
00:15:32.240 ref he's using a computer reference he
00:15:33.680 says in Computing the highest order bit
00:15:36.279 also called The most significant bit is
00:15:38.160 the bit position in a binary number
00:15:40.000 having the greatest value and so in
00:15:41.639 Steve's case what he's talking about on
00:15:42.959 stage is the fact that you got to love
00:15:44.399 what you're doing you got to have
00:15:45.199 passion because if you're doing anything
00:15:46.800 that's worthwhile it's so difficult that
00:15:49.800 if you don't love it you don't have
00:15:50.759 passion you're going to quit because the
00:15:52.560 people that quit doing things they don't
00:15:54.160 love they're sane people and that this
00:15:56.160 love and passion for what you're doing
00:15:57.480 can make you in some ways irrational and
00:15:59.839 that irrationality is rewarded because
00:16:02.240 you just don't give up you have this
00:16:03.639 like dogged determination so I
00:16:05.759 understand who am I going to argue with
00:16:07.519 Steve but I don't know I obviously
00:16:09.800 believe that I'm like completely obsess
00:16:11.000 what I'm doing but I think actually the
00:16:12.639 highest order bit it's belief it's
00:16:15.759 belief in yourself and it's belief in
00:16:17.639 your idea and in hans's story that's
00:16:20.040 certainly the case it wasn't passion and
00:16:21.839 love it was belief that he saw an
00:16:24.079 opportunity and he was willing to pursue
00:16:26.079 it and to actually change the entire
00:16:28.279 industry and you know what I thought of
00:16:30.199 when I read this section the first thing
00:16:32.040 this I mean this happened
00:16:32.880 instantaneously too which is fascinating
00:16:34.680 because this is one of the most
00:16:35.560 important things I thought of this
00:16:36.959 paragraph in Ted Turner's autobiography
00:16:38.720 this is episode
00:16:40.000 327 and it's just remarkable because Ted
00:16:43.720 is looking at the landscape right he's
00:16:46.600 he's like I'm going to make the world's
00:16:48.240 first 24-hour News Network that idea led
00:16:52.360 him to become a billionaire but he's
00:16:53.959 analyzing this he's like wait I don't
00:16:55.800 understand this why am I seeing the
00:16:57.519 opportunity that no one else is and so
00:16:59.279 this is from this is the paragraph that
00:17:00.639 I thought of when I was reading this
00:17:02.240 Hans describing the opportunity that he
00:17:03.920 saw and this is Ted Turner writing in
00:17:05.559 his autobiography clearly the companies
00:17:07.319 for whom the economics of a 24-hour News
00:17:09.520 Network would have made the most sense
00:17:11.480 were the big three broadcasters right so
00:17:13.799 ABC CBS NBC why because they already had
00:17:17.000 most of what was needed they had Studios
00:17:19.599 they had bureaus they had reporters they
00:17:21.839 had anchors they had almost everything
00:17:24.720 but a belief in
00:17:26.640 cable Ted Turner had had the highest
00:17:29.640 order bit he didn't have a studio he
00:17:32.240 didn't have the bureaus he didn't have
00:17:33.559 the reporters he didn't have the anchors
00:17:35.039 he'd have to go and collect and build
00:17:36.480 that but he had something they didn't he
00:17:38.640 had a belief in cable and the crazy
00:17:41.640 thing is like there's a great
00:17:42.880 description of this I got to read this
00:17:44.160 story because it's hilarious Ted Turner
00:17:45.799 is 38 years old when this story happens
00:17:48.160 and this guy interviewed in his
00:17:49.559 autobiographies saying that they just
00:17:50.960 happen to wind up being on a plane
00:17:52.880 together they wind up uh sitting next to
00:17:54.559 each other and he says as soon as we get
00:17:56.400 airborne Ted pulls out a copy of the
00:17:58.080 Delta lines Delta Airlines magazine he
00:18:00.480 turns to the map of United States and
00:18:01.880 starts explaining how he's going to
00:18:03.159 become a billionaire and he quotes Ted
00:18:05.200 here goes make sure you buy my stock I'm
00:18:06.520 going to be a billionaire and why and he
00:18:08.159 just lays out this entire thing and then
00:18:10.200 the story ends perfectly he says his
00:18:12.039 enthusiasm was so genuine and so
00:18:13.919 infectious that I'll never forget it so
00:18:16.159 go back to that this is what what a
00:18:17.760 sentence I had very early realized the
00:18:19.919 manifold possibilities of the riskwatch
00:18:21.400 and feeling sure that they would
00:18:22.960 materialize in time I resolutely went on
00:18:25.840 my way Rolex was thus able to get
00:18:27.919 several years ahead of other watch
00:18:29.720 manufacturers who persisted in clinging
00:18:31.320 to the pocket watch as their Chief
00:18:32.799 product if I remember correctly Ted
00:18:35.280 Turner had like 11year head start on
00:18:37.200 everybody else it's
00:18:38.960 absurd okay so how does he start acting
00:18:41.400 on this belief I think one thing that's
00:18:43.120 important to understand the story of
00:18:44.240 Hans wilsdorf is the fact that he
00:18:46.120 understood the opportunity better than
00:18:47.360 anybody else and he would invest heavily
00:18:49.159 in developing the technology that he
00:18:51.080 needed to bring it to fruition and so
00:18:53.120 again it goes back to this idea that the
00:18:54.400 whole world is a classroom that you
00:18:55.679 never know how your previous experience
00:18:57.200 the things that you're learning will be
00:18:58.840 use in the future this you know
00:19:00.280 knowledge skills relationships all these
00:19:01.799 things compound so you know years before
00:19:04.080 he founds his own company he's working
00:19:06.320 at that firm in Switzerland and he hears
00:19:08.919 about this guy named Herman egler and
00:19:11.360 Herman's Innovation that he made in 1902
00:19:13.799 was these movements that you need inside
00:19:15.799 of a watch he made movements that would
00:19:18.320 work in smaller watches and so Hans is
00:19:21.720 going to learn this many years before
00:19:23.200 he's able he has actually the company to
00:19:24.640 actually use it but he says my interest
00:19:25.960 had been roused by this Innovation as
00:19:28.600 the the mechanism created by agler right
00:19:31.120 had proved very successful from a
00:19:32.919 technical point of view as well as being
00:19:35.039 accessible in price so then after
00:19:37.600 founding my firm in 1905 I go and place
00:19:40.880 an order with egler this was the first
00:19:43.960 step forward in our climbed success so I
00:19:46.280 need to bring there's a bunch of other
00:19:48.000 things I read uh to to prepare for this
00:19:50.240 podcast uh I'll leave all of them linked
00:19:52.440 down below I pulled out a bunch of
00:19:54.159 different books uh but this podcast my
00:19:56.360 friend Patrick did it's one of the best
00:19:58.120 business podcast I've ever heard in my
00:19:59.400 life I don't even know how many times
00:20:00.360 I've listened to it now it is an episode
00:20:02.240 of business breakdowns I will link it
00:20:03.640 down below but if you just go on your
00:20:04.720 podcast player look for business
00:20:05.720 breakdowns and then search just search
00:20:07.400 Rolex it has a great name too Rolex
00:20:09.799 Timeless Excellence my friend Patrick
00:20:12.039 interviewed Ben Kimber Ben's the founder
00:20:13.600 of hinki he got access back in like 2015
00:20:16.080 he's one of the first people roox
00:20:17.480 because they're super super secretive
00:20:19.120 but he was one of the first people to
00:20:20.400 actually go and Tour all of their four
00:20:22.240 manufacturing uh facilities so he wrote
00:20:24.799 this fantastic article that I also
00:20:26.640 reread and then uh he talks a lot about
00:20:29.200 the history of Rolex and then how they
00:20:30.799 operate today but the reason I need to
00:20:32.520 bring this up is cuz egler is a very
00:20:34.400 important name in the history of Rolex
00:20:36.039 from the very start of Rolex agler is
00:20:38.000 actually the one manufacturing the
00:20:39.280 watches that were sold as Rolex watches
00:20:41.919 buying these movements from agler is
00:20:43.960 what Hans describes is his very first
00:20:45.919 step forward in our clim to success now
00:20:47.679 the crazy thing the reason I bring this
00:20:48.880 up is because I also love like an old
00:20:50.919 school keep your word mentality so Hans
00:20:54.000 and the founder of agler had a handshake
00:20:56.880 deal for7
00:20:59.120 years and the deal was that agler would
00:21:01.840 make movements solely for Rolex and when
00:21:04.039 they say there's a great line in the
00:21:06.080 podcast episode when he's like when I
00:21:07.679 say an actual handshake deal I mean a
00:21:10.080 handshake deal there was nothing on
00:21:12.039 paper there was nothing in writing all
00:21:14.520 the way up until 2004 when Rolex finally
00:21:17.480 buys agler undoubtedly undoubtedly at
00:21:21.400 that point in 2004 Rolex is already
00:21:23.120 making selling you know billions of
00:21:24.840 dollars worth of watches that's nuts and
00:21:27.320 I just love that you know two founders
00:21:29.799 of companies coming together say hey
00:21:31.080 we're going to work together I'm a man
00:21:32.919 of my word we're going to seal this with
00:21:34.320 a handshake and that relationship and
00:21:36.919 agreement was unbroken for seven decades
00:21:39.120 that's one of the coolest things I've
00:21:40.039 ever heard and so Hans is going to
00:21:42.360 describe so you have the manufacturing
00:21:44.000 and the making of Rolex watches or
00:21:45.200 what's going to be sold under Rolex
00:21:46.240 brand which I haven't even got there yet
00:21:47.679 is going to happen in Switzerland he's
00:21:48.880 still in London so the design and the
00:21:51.400 sales is separate from the manufacturing
00:21:53.799 and so he would travel from London to
00:21:55.400 Switzerland several times a year and he
00:21:57.159 says I would bring with my collabor ERS
00:21:58.880 new and personal ideas demanding that
00:22:00.880 they be realized in this way hundreds of
00:22:03.440 models were conceived and launched all
00:22:05.919 across the world he's selling this again
00:22:07.760 this goes back to the world's entire
00:22:09.360 classroom you have no idea how you're
00:22:10.600 going to use all the the experience you
00:22:11.880 have remember he was he worked for an
00:22:14.559 importer they were taking Swiss watches
00:22:17.039 and sending them everywhere so he's just
00:22:18.679 doing the same thing now with his own
00:22:19.840 products and as we'll see he's a master
00:22:21.919 marketer which I'll get into a minute
00:22:23.240 but he's having immediate success this
00:22:25.279 is how both a new fashion and a great
00:22:27.480 commercial success sprang from an
00:22:29.640 apparently full hearty idea he's
00:22:31.880 referencing the fact that everybody
00:22:32.880 around him thought what he was doing was
00:22:34.159 silly men are never going to wear these
00:22:36.440 watches soon we were placing orders for
00:22:38.840 tens of thousands and to the uninformed
00:22:42.440 must have appeared extremely audacious
00:22:45.600 young people when I read that I thought
00:22:47.120 of one of my favorite things Winston
00:22:48.400 church ever did he had a personal motto
00:22:50.039 that he'd repeat he would say aloud to
00:22:51.760 himself always more audacity Hans when a
00:22:55.360 young man was he was many things but one
00:22:57.679 of the things he was he was definitely
00:22:59.080 audacious I love the idea it's like
00:23:00.799 these guys are crazy they they are
00:23:02.400 extremely audacious young people and so
00:23:05.559 at this point I need to be clear about
00:23:06.840 something this is not Rolex he's selling
00:23:08.799 under a ton of different brand names
00:23:10.360 he's eventually going to realize hey I
00:23:11.679 don't want to just be sit in the middle
00:23:13.720 right I don't want to be a middle man I
00:23:14.840 want like all the value creation is
00:23:16.039 going to be if I own my own brand and
00:23:18.440 this is what I meant about this like
00:23:19.559 constant iteration this trial and error
00:23:21.320 I'm going to read some of the brand
00:23:22.320 names he had they're they're freaking
00:23:24.000 terrible and so at this point pre you
00:23:26.320 know doubling down on this fantastic
00:23:28.000 idea of he hasn't discovered that yet so
00:23:30.320 what he's doing is like there's a bunch
00:23:31.799 of other brand names that he's he's
00:23:34.120 experimenting with he had this idea this
00:23:35.919 is hilarious too because I was reading
00:23:37.440 about this because you know Rolex isn't
00:23:39.320 now there's I don't even think there's
00:23:40.440 such thing as a cheap Rolex right and so
00:23:42.799 he had this idea he's like well I can
00:23:44.080 supply a watch for every pocket and what
00:23:47.400 that means is like let's say you can
00:23:48.600 order you know I'm making these numbers
00:23:50.400 up like a $5 watch or a $100 watch or
00:23:53.000 $2,000 watch it's like I want to I'm
00:23:55.120 going to serve every single aspect of
00:23:57.120 the market which obviously they don't do
00:23:58.279 any anymore this is his iteration is
00:24:00.320 like learning from experience I thought
00:24:02.559 he the note of myself has actually made
00:24:04.440 me chuckle CU I've done a bunch of
00:24:05.600 episodes on these uh the early
00:24:07.240 automobile industry Founders and I go oh
00:24:09.640 Hans was GM General Motors before
00:24:11.799 focusing in on Ferrari like that's the
00:24:14.080 way I think about it and so listen to
00:24:16.039 some of these brand names I love this
00:24:17.760 because I you know you've heard me
00:24:18.880 struggle with naming stuff all the time
00:24:20.960 and think about last week Steve Jobs or
00:24:22.799 the week before Steve Jobs thinking
00:24:24.120 calling the iMac the macman like the
00:24:25.919 just terrible ideas so I I take solace
00:24:28.440 inspiration with the fact that like oh
00:24:30.120 everybody struggles with this stuff and
00:24:32.000 so even you know Rolex is one of the
00:24:33.919 best names I've ever heard one of the
00:24:35.240 best Brands ever existed and before that
00:24:37.360 he had unicorn Rollo elvir roll watchco
00:24:42.720 Falcon genx lonx Rolex rolexus Lexus
00:24:49.039 hoffex and
00:24:50.799 winex he even used different variation
00:24:53.279 of the Rolex name itself he had the
00:24:55.159 Rolex watch company he had the RWC
00:24:57.760 Limited and he would even combine Rolex
00:25:00.919 with other brand names and this again
00:25:02.960 this is where he just realized this is a
00:25:04.399  terrible idea I'm trying to sell
00:25:06.760 every single price point on a watch so
00:25:09.360 uh there was one Marone named after the
00:25:11.760 inventor of the radio and so he had one
00:25:13.919 called the Rolex Marone and all that did
00:25:16.520 was allow people to think that they're
00:25:17.799 buying Rolex but they're getting it at a
00:25:19.120 cheaper price and so it's through all
00:25:20.600 this trial and error where Hans realize
00:25:22.600 like oh this is a terrible idea I'm
00:25:23.679 cannibalizing sales like this doesn't
00:25:25.000 make sense I'm going to focus and so
00:25:26.679 this is where in 1908 he's like okay
00:25:28.360 okay I'm going to have like one single
00:25:30.279 brand name and a brand that I can invest
00:25:32.360 in for the long term so he says it was
00:25:33.799 time to think of giving our watches a
00:25:34.919 name of their own a trade name what we
00:25:36.760 would call a brand name a brand name
00:25:38.840 which could be inscribed on the dials I
00:25:41.279 was well aware that unless I succeeded
00:25:42.919 in making rat known under its own name
00:25:45.600 that my prospects would be limited he
00:25:48.200 would just be a middleman right and so
00:25:50.120 there's actually a letter that he wrote
00:25:51.440 in 1958 where he's talking about how he
00:25:53.760 came up with Rolex he had a series of
00:25:56.200 traits that the name had to have and for
00:25:58.840 for him to select it and so he said I
00:26:00.480 needed a short name it had to be five
00:26:01.880 letters or less because it has to be
00:26:03.960 able to fit it has to look good on the
00:26:05.799 actual watch it has to be easy to
00:26:07.600 pronounce in every language it has to
00:26:09.360 have a good ring to it and it has to be
00:26:10.960 easy to remember and so when I was
00:26:12.320 thinking about this I was like how great
00:26:13.960 he did in selecting the name Rolex if
00:26:16.120 you listened to last week's episode
00:26:17.360 about how Steve Jobs sold one of the
00:26:19.000 ideas main ideas from how Steve Jobs
00:26:20.840 communicated how he sold his ideas to
00:26:22.559 people was that if you can make them
00:26:24.799 ideas easy to understand then they're
00:26:26.480 easy to spread ideas that are easy to
00:26:28.679 understand or easy to spread and I think
00:26:30.440 you see an echo of that idea with hans's
00:26:32.440 naming and actually picking like this is
00:26:34.440 the brand that I'm going to build and
00:26:35.919 the one I'm going to invest in for the
00:26:37.120 rest of my life so now that he has a
00:26:39.039 name he does something that's really
00:26:40.320 really smart again this is very uncommon
00:26:42.200 for watchmakers to advertise directly to
00:26:44.559 the public not only does he do so but he
00:26:46.720 Rolex continues to do so so he says I
00:26:48.880 decided to launch the Rolex trademark by
00:26:50.840 means of an intensive advertising
00:26:52.760 campaign this policy entailed an annual
00:26:55.120 expenditure of more than 12,000 British
00:26:57.399 pounds not for one year alone but for
00:27:00.159 several in succession so I want to go
00:27:02.159 back to how important this is I want to
00:27:04.279 go back to that business breakdowns
00:27:05.600 episode on Rolex called Timeless
00:27:07.080 Excellence so it says Rolex was
00:27:08.960 effectively the first people to have
00:27:10.559 real marketing dollars put behind a
00:27:12.279 watch Rolex did this in a concentrated
00:27:15.240 way and they have continued to do it in
00:27:17.039 a way that is simply just unmatched by
00:27:19.240 others in their industry Rolex has been
00:27:21.360 the number one brand for watches in the
00:27:23.000 United States historically speaking from
00:27:24.399 the 1950s to today now I want a fast
00:27:27.080 forward way ahead in the story many many
00:27:29.799 years after Hans died because I think
00:27:31.720 this this idea is so important and I'm
00:27:33.559 going to show where I've seen this idea
00:27:35.240 other people use this idea successfully
00:27:36.679 as well in a different industry uh so go
00:27:38.799 back to the transcript from this episode
00:27:40.559 The the financial crisis of 2008 all the
00:27:42.799 other brands the competitors you know
00:27:44.679 Omega tagu all these other the brands
00:27:48.000 that are quote competitors to Rolex when
00:27:50.320 the financial crisis happens in 2008
00:27:51.960 they pull back on their marketing Rolex
00:27:54.519 did not Rolex put the pedal down and it
00:27:57.000 was really 2008 9 2010 which really
00:28:00.000 elevated Rolex in the United States to a
00:28:01.760 level that it is today if you speak to
00:28:04.000 them directly meaning Rolex the company
00:28:05.679 directly they'll credit that period as a
00:28:08.240 turning point for them in the US now
00:28:10.880 what is incredible is Izzy sharp who's
00:28:13.159 the founder of Four Seasons this is
00:28:14.559 episode 184 episode 184 if you haven't
00:28:17.159 listened to it you should his
00:28:18.039 autobiography is incredible Izzy sharp
00:28:20.720 did the exact same thing this is what he
00:28:23.960 says in his autobiography right founder
00:28:25.799 Four Seasons it's tempting during a
00:28:27.080 recession to cut back on consumer
00:28:28.240 advertising at the start of each each of
00:28:30.279 the last three recessions the growth of
00:28:31.799 spending on such advertising has slowed
00:28:33.720 by an average of 27% but consumer
00:28:35.960 studies of those recessions have showed
00:28:38.240 that the companies that didn't cut their
00:28:40.120 ads had in recovery captured the most
00:28:43.600 market share it's exactly what happened
00:28:45.440 with Rolex in 2008 2009 2010 we did not
00:28:48.519 cut back on our ad budget this is now
00:28:50.720 founder Four Seasons again we did not
00:28:52.480 come back on our ad budget in fact we
00:28:54.000 raised it to gain brand recognition
00:28:56.519 which continued advertising sustained is
00:28:59.519 much easier to sustain momentum than
00:29:02.000 restart it so think about how important
00:29:04.840 that intuition was he like well I'm
00:29:06.440 starting a new name all these other
00:29:08.080 watchmakers they're not advertising like
00:29:09.519 why don't we why why would we advertise
00:29:11.760 it doesn't make sense other products are
00:29:13.039 advertised we should do that and I'm
00:29:14.399 going to do an intensive L is the words
00:29:15.880 to use I'm going to do an intensive
00:29:17.440 advertising campaign and not just this
00:29:19.360 year but several years in succession and
00:29:22.440 then this is nuts I know I keep saying
00:29:23.880 that because this whole story is nuts
00:29:25.519 because it the industry today in large
00:29:28.519 part to the to what Hans and Rolex did
00:29:30.440 is completely different so at this time
00:29:32.360 you have your own watch brand but you
00:29:34.000 don't have your own stores so you're
00:29:35.480 selling to retailers at the time the
00:29:37.880 watch brands don't have the names on the
00:29:40.519 watches the retailers would buy the
00:29:43.399 watches and put their name on it and so
00:29:45.799 Hans talks about being one of the first
00:29:47.320 people like no no no like I'm going to
00:29:48.919 sell you my I'm going to wholesale my
00:29:50.440 watch and you're going to put my brand
00:29:51.919 name on it not yours I think it was like
00:29:53.840 a decade or a decade and a half if I
00:29:55.399 remember correctly where he had to fight
00:29:56.840 so he said something like you you know
00:29:58.600 when I first started doing this one out
00:30:00.080 of six they they would agree like one
00:30:01.480 out of six watches could have my name on
00:30:02.840 it then it was two out of six then three
00:30:04.480 out of six and then finally five out of
00:30:06.080 six and insisting on doing this is
00:30:08.600 actually really really important because
00:30:10.080 he also is a perfectionist and so he
00:30:11.840 realizes like oh quality I said in the
00:30:14.000 Steve one of Steve Jobs episodes I just
00:30:15.320 did that quality was his survival
00:30:16.840 strategy I would say for Hans was the
00:30:18.480 exact same thing he's determined to
00:30:20.000 produce the best W wristwatch possible
00:30:21.760 and we'll go into how accurate and the
00:30:23.720 ways he was did really smart like
00:30:25.679 marketing around that too so he he
00:30:27.600 thought that was a key to success like I
00:30:28.919 just have to be the best possible and
00:30:30.600 he's not going to be able to do that
00:30:32.240 unless customers demand that they get a
00:30:34.720 Rolex and not just same watch which is
00:30:37.080 just renamed by whatever shop they
00:30:38.679 happen to be buying it from and
00:30:40.320 insisting that the name is seen because
00:30:42.240 before the the the brand name could be
00:30:43.960 seen inside the watch but no one the
00:30:45.679 customers are not opening up the watches
00:30:47.519 and so I think this idea is really
00:30:48.960 really important I'm going to read a
00:30:49.919 summary of this entire section to you he
00:30:51.840 also realized that he would get better
00:30:53.000 orders and more control over the
00:30:54.279 wholesale price of his watches if he
00:30:56.080 could build up demand so that customers
00:30:57.600 would go in the shop and ask for and
00:30:59.799 insist on a Rolex watch by name by his
00:31:02.840 branding and advertising campaigns Hans
00:31:05.120 effectively turned the tables on the
00:31:06.840 retailers no longer would he have to
00:31:09.240 approach retailers and ask them to stock
00:31:11.880 his watches customers would demand Rolex
00:31:14.840 branded watches and the retailers would
00:31:17.399 have to come to
00:31:19.320 him so as you already know I'm obsessed
00:31:21.960 by these people that identify a handful
00:31:23.679 handful of principles they know what's
00:31:25.440 important to their business and they
00:31:26.600 just execute on those princi principles
00:31:28.240 they repeat them for decades and that's
00:31:30.480 exactly what Rolex did that's exactly
00:31:32.000 what Hans did he had essentially three
00:31:34.039 things that and it took him what I'm
00:31:35.519 about to describe to is going to you
00:31:36.519 know take two decades maybe to actually
00:31:38.919 fulfill to the degree that he wanted to
00:31:40.720 because remember he starts his company
00:31:41.880 back in
00:31:43.519 1905 the first waterproof watch is one
00:31:46.320 to be one of his three tenants isn't
00:31:47.840 going to happen for 20 years after that
00:31:50.360 and I think another six years after that
00:31:51.679 till he gets to Perpetual so he has
00:31:53.200 three things he wants he goes I want the
00:31:55.080 watches to be precise which he he
00:31:57.159 handles that product that problem first
00:31:59.600 uh number two I want them to be
00:32:01.360 waterproof and number three I want them
00:32:03.360 to be self-winding and so the first
00:32:05.360 thing he does is like okay my watches
00:32:06.960 again he's a perfectionist they have to
00:32:08.279 be the best in the world so he goes to
00:32:10.120 agler and he's like how can we improve
00:32:12.159 the timekeeping of the watches and one
00:32:14.559 thing that Charlie Munger says in poor
00:32:16.080 Charlie domac is that social proof is a
00:32:17.919 form of Leverage and so what Hans does
00:32:20.159 here is very smart he insists he goes to
00:32:22.720 agler and he's like hey I want to get
00:32:24.559 certificates of performance from
00:32:25.880 independent testing establishments and
00:32:28.039 so these are actually like astronomical
00:32:30.080 observatories they'll test how good
00:32:32.360 these pieces are at eke keeping
00:32:33.480 essentially and so there is a letter
00:32:35.639 that Hans writes to agler in 1912 and
00:32:38.559 he's like hey we need to produce a wiat
00:32:40.279 that's capable of achieving an
00:32:41.480 observatory timekeeping certificate two
00:32:44.360 years later in 1914 agler actually
00:32:46.960 solves that problem for Hans and so
00:32:49.360 Rolex achieves the first class a
00:32:51.320 certificate ever to be awarded by an
00:32:52.919 observatory for a wristatch this is what
00:32:55.200 Hans says in his autobiography another
00:32:57.000 red letter day that development of our
00:32:58.440 firm was when a small Rolex wristwatch
00:33:01.360 won a Class A certificate at the famous
00:33:04.919 Q Observatory this was on July 15th 1914
00:33:09.159 and it was a day I shall never forget
00:33:11.240 and keep that in mind he is writing uh
00:33:13.600 about this 50 years later and so the
00:33:16.399 reason I brought up what Charlie merer
00:33:17.720 said is because he uses this social
00:33:19.399 proof right saying what's funny is I
00:33:21.919 read a bun there's so there's so many
00:33:23.440 Fantastic uh old Rolex ads that that
00:33:26.320 were published When Hans was alive and
00:33:28.039 if you look at them like they a lot of
00:33:29.320 their ads say like the first the only so
00:33:31.960 they'll say like the world's first
00:33:33.039 self-winding watch the world's first
00:33:35.399 waterproof riskwatch another ad I found
00:33:37.720 that says the Rolex Still Remains the
00:33:39.279 only riskwatch in the world to gain
00:33:41.120 certificates at Q and so if you think
00:33:43.320 about that insistence on this idea to
00:33:44.960 get to become the first to get the
00:33:46.159 certificate what happens that makes your
00:33:47.480 ads more effective it's one form of
00:33:49.799 Leverage stacked on another people are
00:33:52.320 busy if they're in the market for a
00:33:53.679 wristwatch right they want to have one
00:33:55.480 that's most accurate and guess what
00:33:56.840 there's only one brand in the world that
00:33:58.919 has proven it keeps it keeps time so
00:34:01.919 precise that went that extra step to get
00:34:04.639 it tested to get an observatory
00:34:06.639 timekeeping certificate that is another
00:34:09.280 example of doing as much work as
00:34:10.879 possible for the customers we talked a
00:34:12.320 lot about the last two weeks for for
00:34:13.599 Steve Jobs Hans is doing the same thing
00:34:15.760 it just makes it your decision easier oh
00:34:17.280 okay oh I want a precise obviously you
00:34:19.280 want a precise wristwatch oh these are
00:34:20.879 the most precise okay cool that makes my
00:34:23.119 my buying decision so much easier and so
00:34:25.480 that is in 1914 now he wanted the the
00:34:28.280 second part he's got that three part
00:34:29.599 he's like I want him to be precise I
00:34:30.679 want him to be waterproof I want to be
00:34:31.960 self-winding and so this goes back to
00:34:33.839 what I told you about one of the most
00:34:34.879 important things to understand about
00:34:35.800 Hans is the fact that he understood the
00:34:37.159 opportunity better than anybody else and
00:34:38.520 he would invest heavily in developing
00:34:40.040 the technology to bring his ideas to
00:34:42.440 fruition and that means he didn't have
00:34:44.760 to invent it himself he would buy the
00:34:46.679 inventions of other watchmakers and then
00:34:49.879 combine their ideas with his efforts and
00:34:52.320 look at how fast he would move so
00:34:53.918 there's two inventors they're in
00:34:55.119 Switzerland they F they file a Swiss
00:34:57.000 patent and they create the world's first
00:34:59.160 waterproof seal for a wristwatch the
00:35:01.839 patent is granted and published on May
00:35:05.119 1926 Hans buys the P patent in July two
00:35:09.880 much 60 days later he already owns the
00:35:12.079 patent and what does that mean he owns
00:35:14.119 the patent so of course now this new
00:35:15.839 innovation is only it's exclusive to
00:35:18.119 Rolex watches you see how he's stacking
00:35:19.599 one advantage over another he's like hey
00:35:21.800 we have the most accurate wristwatch in
00:35:23.520 the world here's proof oh now we have
00:35:25.599 this new technology guess who owns the
00:35:27.400 patent we do you can only get it here
00:35:29.359 and so this is the creation of the
00:35:30.839 oyster watch which still the oyster
00:35:32.880 classification that's waterproof and so
00:35:34.680 in his autobiography he's laying out
00:35:36.599 like this is all the problems I had to
00:35:38.040 solve and this is why I had to solve
00:35:39.599 them in sequential order and how once
00:35:41.280 they're solved gives me just an unfair
00:35:43.000 advantage that no one else has so he
00:35:44.359 says on looking back into the past I
00:35:45.800 find that in developing and extending my
00:35:47.680 business I've always had certain AIMS in
00:35:49.800 mind this course from which I never
00:35:53.160 deviated keep the main thing the main
00:35:55.359 thing is what he's saying perhaps these
00:35:56.599 aims can be summarized as follows number
00:35:58.160 one I have to create watch designs
00:35:59.680 suitable for both men and women done
00:36:01.880 number two I have to standardize a range
00:36:03.680 of movements of different sizes done
00:36:05.880 number three to obtain a high degree of
00:36:07.800 quality that our watches whatever the
00:36:09.800 Cali caliber should be recognized as
00:36:12.000 chronometers by the observatories that's
00:36:14.160 the Q uh certificate done next one to
00:36:17.839 maintain this High degree of precision
00:36:20.520 by protecting the movements against the
00:36:22.599 penetration of dust and impurities the
00:36:25.200 danger to which the wristatch is
00:36:26.880 particularly exposed and that was why he
00:36:29.440 needed this this patent this waterproof
00:36:32.520 seal that proved so important it's going
00:36:34.720 to unlock his abilities to do the
00:36:36.119 Perpetual in a minute but he talks about
00:36:37.760 he tells us in his own words why this is
00:36:39.880 so important this last Point presented a
00:36:41.760 problem which could only be resolved by
00:36:43.839 protecting the movement against all
00:36:45.599 outside
00:36:46.839 influences to my technical assistance my
00:36:49.599 refrain my constant refrain was from the
00:36:51.599 very earliest days we must succeed in
00:36:54.040 making a watch case so tight that our
00:36:56.119 movements will be permanently G
00:36:57.599 guaranteed against D damage caused by
00:36:59.800 dust water heat and cold only then will
00:37:03.800 the perfect accuracy of the Rolex be
00:37:07.160 secured why am I reading this all to you
00:37:09.400 because he's going to tell us why this
00:37:10.720 is so important this seemingly
00:37:12.440 insolvable problem has been solved the
00:37:15.079 waterproof case was finally created in
00:37:17.760 1926 this invention was applied
00:37:20.160 exclusively to the Rolex watch the fact
00:37:23.280 is like an oyster it can remain an
00:37:24.920 unlimited time underwater without
00:37:26.920 detriment to its parts the name Rolex
00:37:30.359 Oyster has become famous throughout the
00:37:34.040 world and I love that he said that the
00:37:36.480 name becomes famous because it sets up
00:37:38.319 for the next part how did the name
00:37:39.680 become famous well remember Hans is a
00:37:41.359 gifted marketer he takes an event and
00:37:43.760 he's going to do this multiple times he
00:37:45.599 takes an event that's already getting a
00:37:46.800 lot of attention and inserts his product
00:37:49.000 and therefore amplifies and leverages
00:37:51.760 that existing attention and so there was
00:37:53.800 a secretary named Mercedes who had swam
00:37:56.040 the English Channel before she was is
00:37:57.599 doing it again he hears about this so
00:37:59.640 he's like okay wear a Rolex Oyster
00:38:01.760 around your neck and so she goes for
00:38:03.680 another attempt this time she actually
00:38:05.280 fails she I think she's she gets uh like
00:38:07.599 10 hours and then her there's like
00:38:09.119 muscle cramps or something like that but
00:38:10.720 the fact is no one since she'd already
00:38:12.480 done it that was like kind of irrelevant
00:38:14.200 to the story because it's still being
00:38:15.800 covered the fact that she was in these
00:38:16.880 freezing cold water in November swinging
00:38:18.560 the English Channel and that the Rolex
00:38:20.720 was around her neck it survived and kept
00:38:23.160 perfect time for the entire 10 hours and
00:38:25.119 even after the fact of when she was
00:38:26.359 swimming the channel so what do he do he
00:38:27.800 takes that it's been covered and then he
00:38:29.079 runs this gigantic ad and he has a great
00:38:31.560 line when he describes it he says that
00:38:33.079 they found the watch was still running
00:38:34.280 as perfectly as it had as if it had
00:38:36.480 never left dry land and so he says the
00:38:38.920 event caused a sensation at the time for
00:38:40.599 the waterproof watch was still unknown
00:38:42.720 to the general public on November 27th
00:38:44.599 1927 I reserved the front page of the
00:38:46.680 Daily Mail newspaper at a cost of a ton
00:38:49.440 of money for an ad proclaiming the
00:38:51.720 success of the first waterproof watch
00:38:55.200 this was the first step in the
00:38:56.440 triumphant rise of of the fame of the
00:38:58.599 Rolex Oyster but look at how fast he
00:39:01.040 moves so this is invented in May 1926 he
00:39:03.880 buys it in July 1926 the next year he
00:39:07.760 takes advantage of this news event this
00:39:09.920 you know this event that's going to get
00:39:11.440 a ton of idea Eyes On It Anyways
00:39:13.640 amplifies his product that same year in
00:39:15.760 1927 he goes and creates these window
00:39:19.359 displays and all of the retailers that
00:39:21.200 are now going to sell his watch and so
00:39:23.440 this is how he describes it we devised
00:39:24.839 special window displays that which gave
00:39:26.440 the buying great pleasure the chief
00:39:29.200 feature was an aquarium with other
00:39:31.359 plants and goldfish and in it was
00:39:33.280 plunged an oyster watch which was the
00:39:36.520 only watch in the world that was as
00:39:37.920 watertight as an oyster this same year
00:39:41.119 he gets one of the top British actresses
00:39:43.640 and that he starts running ads the the
00:39:45.880 ad is one of the top British act
00:39:47.960 actresses her hand is in like a goldfish
00:39:51.160 Bowl so half of her arm is in a tank and
00:39:54.079 then you could see that she's wearing
00:39:55.000 the
00:39:55.680 watch and so he'll uses idea over and
00:39:57.800 over again and one of the things that
00:39:58.839 Rolex does it's phenomenal is like they
00:40:00.680 always associate themselves with the
00:40:01.960 very very best so another British guy
00:40:04.200 named Malcolm Campbell he broke like the
00:40:06.520 land speed record in a car like nine
00:40:09.119 different times and the last time that
00:40:10.599 he did it Hans learns that Malcolm
00:40:13.160 Campell had been wearing a Rolex when he
00:40:14.720 broke the speed record and so then he
00:40:16.480 starts publicizing he starts running ads
00:40:18.960 broadcasting that during this
00:40:20.480 record-breaking land speed attempt the
00:40:22.800 driver was wearing a Rolex so Hans is
00:40:25.480 doing this in the 1920s he does do this
00:40:27.599 until he dies he does this over and over
00:40:29.560 again he wanted to place Rolex watches
00:40:31.720 on the wrist of as many high-profile
00:40:34.480 people like extreme Achievers he would
00:40:36.960 go around and identify these these
00:40:38.440 leaders or these high Achievers and he
00:40:40.200 would give them Rolexes and then they'd
00:40:42.520 be photographed wearing them Winston
00:40:44.599 Churchill uh Dwight D Eisenhower before
00:40:47.440 and during that he uh got elected to the
00:40:49.760 Pres American presidency and keep in
00:40:51.720 mind he's giving these watches to
00:40:52.960 Churchill and jois and how this is post
00:40:55.160 World War II he's aiming straight to the
00:40:57.440 top you know the greatest leaders in
00:40:59.240 World War II There's an actual ad that's
00:41:01.119 run around this time that was excellent
00:41:02.760 the the the tagline is men who guide the
00:41:06.000 Destinies of the world wear Rolex
00:41:08.520 watches Chuck eer the pilot who broke
00:41:11.200 the sound barrier for the very first
00:41:12.560 time he was wearing a Rolex watch that
00:41:14.440 was an ad the expedition that first
00:41:16.560 summited Mount Everest some of the
00:41:18.680 people on the team were wearing Rolexes
00:41:20.280 the same year they get to the deepest
00:41:22.359 level another team went to like the the
00:41:24.480 at the time the deepest level uh that
00:41:26.880 human gone to in the sea I think it was
00:41:28.359 like 10,000 or 12,000 ft underneath and
00:41:30.720 so they run an ad from the top of the
00:41:32.119 world to the Bottom of the Sea Rolex
00:41:34.160 proves Dependable but this constant
00:41:36.240 positioning of Rolex is the very top we
00:41:38.440 are only associated with the very best
00:41:40.079 you go and look at these taglines they
00:41:41.880 would say over and over again Rolex the
00:41:43.280 Masterpiece of watch craftsmanship sold
00:41:45.560 exclusively by quality Jewelers so I'll
00:41:48.760 come back to the ads because I really
00:41:50.160 think the studying the advertising and
00:41:51.520 marketing of Hans like he was a legit
00:41:53.640 gen genius in this domain but I want to
00:41:55.359 I'll come back to that I want to go back
00:41:56.680 to that third pillar that he was trying
00:41:59.200 to do so he starts off with number one I
00:42:01.280 want the watches to be precise he's done
00:42:02.880 that number two I want them to be
00:42:04.319 waterproof he's done that now he says I
00:42:05.960 want them to be self-winding which he's
00:42:08.160 going to call perpetual and so not only
00:42:10.680 is this an example of him him having to
00:42:12.839 solve another long-standing problem but
00:42:15.000 it is another example of something that
00:42:16.240 pops up in the books that you and I talk
00:42:17.560 about the fact that opportunity unlocks
00:42:19.359 more opportunities in the future so he
00:42:21.400 talks about in his autobiography he's
00:42:22.680 like listen the creation of the
00:42:24.359 perpetual watch Whose movement is
00:42:26.079 self-winding and guaranteed to run
00:42:27.960 without interruption this idea of course
00:42:31.119 had preoccupied many famous horologists
00:42:34.960 of the past I am not a watch guy I don't
00:42:37.280 own any watches my wife has a hard
00:42:39.240 enough time getting me to wear a wedding
00:42:40.640 ring I'm very minimalist right so I
00:42:42.760 didn't know what the hell that word was
00:42:44.280 so I looked it up all that is is a
00:42:45.599 horologist is just a person or company
00:42:47.520 that makes or repairs clocks and watches
00:42:49.960 they're also referred to throughout
00:42:51.720 history as a clock maker so what Hans is
00:42:53.960 telling us is like listen this is not I
00:42:55.480 wasn't the first person to notice this
00:42:57.200 this is a problem I was the first person
00:42:59.040 to solve it and I wouldn't have been
00:43:00.839 able to solve it if I didn't solve the
00:43:03.119 waterproofing first he said the
00:43:04.640 waterproof watch had in itself marked a
00:43:07.160 great step forward towards the
00:43:08.319 realization of this new achievement an
00:43:10.160 automatic watch can function with the
00:43:11.480 utmost regularity only if the movement
00:43:14.160 is placed in a waterproof case what he's
00:43:17.280 telling you is oyster unlock the
00:43:19.040 opportunity for Perpetual it had been my
00:43:21.520 belief that the watch of the future is
00:43:22.960 the perpetual watch in other words the
00:43:25.040 automatic or self-winding watch in this
00:43:27.200 field too Rolex has been a Pioneer
00:43:29.800 without the waterproof watch the
00:43:31.520 Perpetual could never have been
00:43:33.359 discovered and so I need to repeat that
00:43:35.119 cuz it's so important without the
00:43:36.079 waterproof watch the Perpetual could
00:43:37.720 never have been discovered now
00:43:38.720 something's also interesting this is
00:43:40.599 like a centuries old problem they're
00:43:42.000 going to run a fantastic ad talking
00:43:43.440 about like about how they solve this
00:43:45.559 this Cent old problem and there's a
00:43:47.599 great line that I found in this Rolex
00:43:49.839 blog that talks about that it says
00:43:51.240 inventing the automatic wristwatch that
00:43:53.240 could wind itself was the dream of the
00:43:55.520 ages in the watch world for centuries
00:43:58.920 many famous watch makers had tried to
00:44:01.800 perfect the automatic or self-winding
00:44:04.040 watch but none were successful there's
00:44:06.680 an important principle here for that you
00:44:08.359 and I can apply to our own work and the
00:44:09.640 fact that the more work that you do for
00:44:11.200 the customer the the the easier you can
00:44:13.440 make for the customer the greater the
00:44:15.720 market can be so before I read this
00:44:17.480 section about why this was so important
00:44:19.400 because you know why constantly whining
00:44:21.079 a watch is a pain in the ass it's not
00:44:23.200 convenient it's not as convenient as a
00:44:25.040 perpetual watch Steve Jobs put this best
00:44:28.400 when he was talking about the difference
00:44:30.000 of you know this hobbyist culture in the
00:44:31.800 early like personal computer industry
00:44:33.400 and he says my vision was to create the
00:44:35.079 first fully packaged computer we were no
00:44:37.640 longer aiming for the handful of
00:44:39.359 hobbyists who like to assemble their own
00:44:41.319 computers who knew how to buy
00:44:42.839 Transformers and keyboards for every one
00:44:45.680 of them there were a thousand people who
00:44:49.160 would want the machine to be ready to
00:44:51.119 run in other words if we can make this
00:44:53.680 easier we can expand the market by a
00:44:56.040 thousand turns out he drastically under
00:44:58.800 underestimated that probably expanded
00:45:01.119 the market by 10 million or 100 million
00:45:03.760 or whatever the crazy number is and so
00:45:06.319 when Rolex creates this Perpetual
00:45:08.960 automatic watch it eliminates the need
00:45:11.119 to ever wind a watch again and so they
00:45:14.079 run this incredible ad that the headline
00:45:16.079 is Master horologist dream is realized
00:45:18.480 104 years after his death and it tells
00:45:21.040 the history of this guy in theory had
00:45:23.720 invented the world's first self-winding
00:45:25.800 watch but he what he she made was
00:45:27.720 imperfect in practice and now us Rolex
00:45:31.760 the only watch company in the world has
00:45:33.520 perfected you know they they they
00:45:35.559 essentially honor him they say he was a
00:45:37.160 great watch maker maybe you know maybe
00:45:38.920 the greatest ever and now his dream is
00:45:41.280 finally realized 104 years after his
00:45:43.240 death and he was realized by Rolex oh by
00:45:45.240 the way do want
00:45:46.640 one and then right before Hans dies he
00:45:50.079 gives this interview and I found a
00:45:52.200 transcript that was translated from
00:45:54.240 French and I think he does a wonderful
00:45:56.599 job summarizing the impact that his
00:45:59.040 60-year career had on the industry that
00:46:02.280 he in large part created I entered the
00:46:04.599 watch business as a young man at 19
00:46:06.480 years of age that was 60 years ago when
00:46:09.160 wrist watches didn't exist wrist watches
00:46:11.680 for men didn't exist at all men wore
00:46:14.280 pocket watches which went from father to
00:46:16.680 son and son to grandson and the
00:46:19.079 opportunity for the watch industry to
00:46:20.640 grow was extremely limited as sales were
00:46:23.400 very slow as a young man I understood it
00:46:26.079 would be very diff ult to obtain results
00:46:28.079 in an industry that had little chance to
00:46:30.440 make lots of money watches were cheap
00:46:33.160 and the quality was not very good
00:46:35.319 especially since there was no Factory
00:46:37.480 able to produce small watches which was
00:46:40.319 necessary for wearing them on your arm
00:46:42.880 the wristwatch was the peak of my career
00:46:45.760 as I foresaw the total development of
00:46:48.040 the wristwatch for the Swiss Watch
00:46:50.319 industry I can say I was one of the
00:46:53.079 initiators in the whole watch industry I
00:46:56.160 was not only the the first to understand
00:46:58.000 the potential of the riskwatch but I
00:47:00.520 also made personal efforts which
00:47:02.920 contributed largely to development of
00:47:05.920 the
00:47:07.599 industry I think it's absolutely
00:47:09.599 incredible to be able to hear the words
00:47:11.240 of somebody had six Decades of
00:47:13.280 experience in his
00:47:14.680 industry and then the last idea I want
00:47:17.440 to leave you with I think speaks to just
00:47:19.200 how unique Hans in his story truly is in
00:47:23.200 1944 Hans set up the Hans willsdorf
00:47:25.440 trust which owns and controls Rolex to
00:47:27.880 this day he brilliantly set up the
00:47:30.440 bylaws of his trust so Rolex could never
00:47:33.079 be sold or made public so it would never
00:47:35.440 have to worry about catering to anything
00:47:37.200 but making Timeless watches if you think
00:47:40.160 about it this means H's vision is still
00:47:42.599 very much alive and being executed on a
00:47:45.160 daily basis despite the fact that he
00:47:47.640 passed away more than half century ago
00:47:50.480 how many people can you think of that
00:47:52.480 build a worldclass business and 50 years
00:47:55.720 after they pass away the company keeps
00:47:58.119 going as if they were still running
00:48:02.000 it and that is where I'll leave it as
00:48:04.720 far as buying the book there's I can
00:48:06.200 only find one copy available it's like
00:48:08.240 $500 but there is a series of other
00:48:10.280 sources that I use for this podcast that
00:48:12.119 I highly recommend I'll link all these
00:48:13.760 Rolex Enthusiast blogs which I thought
00:48:15.400 were fantastic I also used subjects or
00:48:18.040 ideas rather from the book The luxury
00:48:20.119 strategy which I highly recommend it
00:48:21.680 reads like a textbook uh but it's
00:48:23.400 actually fascinating the subtitles break
00:48:25.200 the rules of marketing to build Brands
00:48:27.280 I'll probably do an episode on it uh in
00:48:29.280 the future and then of course what I
00:48:30.800 would do now is listen to that business
00:48:32.359 breakdowns episode on Rolex called
00:48:34.000 Timeless Excellence it covers the
00:48:35.760 history of Rolex but also how they
00:48:37.240 operate the business in present day
00:48:38.680 it'll blow your mind so I will leave
00:48:40.520 that link down below or you can just
00:48:41.760 search business breakdowns Rolex and
00:48:43.440 it'll come up in your podcast player
00:48:45.040 that is
00:48:46.760 351 books down 1,000 to go and I'll talk
00:48:50.119 to you again soon
